Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Kara Okabach. She is
associate professor and director of the Human Eenergetics Laboratory
at the University of Notre Dame. And today we're
talking mostly about human energetics and hunting in human
society. So, Doctor Rockerbach, welcome to the show. It's
a huge pleasure to everyone.
Ricardo, thank you so much for having me on.
I'm really excited about this today.
Awesome. So, let's get into it then. First of
all, just to introduce the first topic here. Could
you tell us what human energetics is about? I
mean, actually, I've already interviewed many anthropologists on the
show, but I don't remember ever Having an interview.
Perhaps we've touched a little bit on uh on
it here and there, but having an interview really
talking directly about human energetics, at least I can't
remember having one of those. So what sorts of
things do you study there?
Yeah, that, that's also a wonderful, you know, shout
out to anthropology being such a broad field that
you can study so many different things. So, human
energetics is basically looking at calories, how many calories
individuals consume. That's one thing you think about the
diet and what's actually be taking in and where
those calories are coming from. Uh, I'm a bit
more interested in where those calories are going. Uh,
HOW do human bodies allocate calories to different tasks,
whether they be tasks that you're aware of, like
running around the block, or the tasks of just
keeping your body alive that are always going on
in the background. And then how the body adjusts
when there's a change, whether internally or externally a
change. How does somebody's metabolism, uh, or energetic throughput
alter in response to those kinds of changes. And
so very broadly, that's what it is, and it
can be used in any number of different contexts,
whether it be anthropology or exercise physiology or medicine.
Uh, A lot of people are looking at this
kind of thing of across fields.
Mhm. And of course, human energetics, I would imagine
we could say has a lot to do with
the kinds of environments humans live in. We can
live in more or less extreme environments. And you've
done some work exactly on that, on humans living
in extreme environments. So, what is exactly an extreme
environment for a human?
Yeah, so, I mean, there are technically, I would
have to go back and look at the exact
numbers, but there are actual technical cutoffs of what
people consider to be extreme heat or extreme cold
or extreme humidity or extreme dryness. Uh, BUT if
you want to think about it, very, and this
is not an accurate definition, but kind of anything
that puts you outside of your thermon-neutral zone, if
we're Talking about extremes of temperature and so our
bodies kind of live at the 98.6, but we
prefer a room temperature at around 70 degrees, and
this is all Fahrenheit. Sorry for folks at home
using Celsius. Um, ANYTHING that pushes your body to
either have to cool down because of a warmer
external temperature or warm up because of colder external
temperature could be considered a bit of an extreme.
But of course that's a simplification, um, and so
when we talk about my work, which is in
Finland. Uh, THEY can have, you know, -40 째C.
I, when I think of Finland, I, I shift
to Celsius. But I think in general I'm in
Fahrenheit. Uh, BUT you know, they can have temperatures
as cold as -30 -40 째C, and that is
an extreme cold environment. Uh, AND we can also
see seasonal extremes. Uh, SO where I live in
the mid West of the United States. Uh, WE
typically have really pleasant summers, but more extreme heat
in summers has become far more common than it
used to be in the past. And so we
are now seeing not only your standard extremes that
have been around a long time, but areas that
are typically temperate, experiencing more extremes as well.
So it has a lot to do with factors
like uh temperature, right? Uh, ARE there other factors
that you also consider?
Uh, TEMPERATURE, humidity, or dryness in the other way,
and high altitude is one of the big classic
extremes within, uh, within anthropology. It's probably one of
the best studied extremes within the field of anthropology
and across the board in any subfield of anthropology,
high altitude, they've done such excellent work, uh, from
the cultural to the genetics, it's absolutely fantastic.
Uh, HIGH altitude is usually associated with less availability
of oxygen in the air,
right? Correct, yeah, the partial pressure of oxygen, you
don't get quite as much in with each breath,
absolutely, but you also get other things usually not
as much plant life. Grow at high altitude, uh,
and the same thing, you don't have quite as
many animals, so you have a kind of a
resource extreme there, uh, and then usually higher UV
exposure from the sun because you are literally physically
closer with less ozone separating you between the, uh,
the sun and your skin.
So I would imagine that one of the questions
that some my audience at this point would be
asking is, since we're now very unfortunately going through
climate change at a global scale, do you think
that studying human energetics could help us deal with
some of the consequences that we will have to
deal with it, particularly in terms of uh temperature
variation?
Yeah, that's a really wonderful question and as somebody
who works in a cold climate, I often get
asked why are you working in the cold? It's
not gonna be cold much longer. Um, HOWEVER, I
do think there is, of course I have to
think that there is a way to relate it
all, and I think energetics is definitely a tool
in the toolkit of maybe not necessarily solving. At
least not right away, solving any issues our bodies
face, but I think it's absolutely important in helping
us understand how our bodies are changing and potential
negative impacts of these climatic shifts to more extremes,
uh, and so. Knowing exactly how many calories can't
necessarily give us, you know, a benefit with climate
change, but seeing how we're responding absolutely can. Um,
AND I also want to zoom out a little
bit and that, you know, anyone who studies energetics,
it's never just energetics, uh, you know, we're also
looking at how physical activity is going to be
shifting because of extremes. So in extreme cold or
extreme heat, people might become less active in order
to stay out of that extreme, and that can
have detrimental health effects. And we also look at
the downstream of how things are changing with body
composition, and how people are also behaviorally and culturally
managing these different extremes that they are now coming
into contact with.
By the way, taking into account this issue of
climate change and because people from different societies are
adapted to specific kinds of climate, is this adaptation
uh mainly a genetic one or can people that
used to live in a particular kind of environment
also adapt to a new one with new environmental
conditions, particularly when it comes To, uh, raising temperatures,
for example, or rising temperatures, for example. Because I
was wondering if, uh, I mean, behaviorally, culturally, or
even physiologically, people even throughout their lifespan can adapt
to environments that would be very different from the
ones they were born in and lived in through
most of their lives.
Yeah, so this becomes a very interesting semantic conversation
unfortunately, of, you know, how you define adaptation, and
I try to be a bit more strict and
and I know I fail at doing this all
the time of what adaptation is, but, you know,
by the classic definition and adaptation is a A
physiological, anatomical, whatever kind of feature you wanna think
of that has a genetic basis that can be
inherited so that it gets passed down from generation
to generation, whether you're still in that high altitude
or not, that those kids will be born with
high altitude adaptations, um. When we think about people
who go from 11 extreme to another extreme, if
they were to develop, you know, an actual adaptation,
that would take generations upon generations to actually develop.
But we do actually physiologically alter our bodies, uh,
in different extremes, and that's called acclimatization. Uh, SO
you have adaptation, which is a permanent thing. You've
got it. It's in your genes, you're not getting
rid of it unless it's happening over multiple generations.
Acclimatization takes, you know, 10 days to 2 weeks.
So for folks who are climbing Mount Everest, for
example, which actually I think we're like right around
that period of time where people might be making
a a summit attempts on Mount Everest, it's usually
right around this time of year. Uh, IT takes,
that's why it actually takes. Them like 2 months
to climb Mount Everest because they're doing this constant
go up and then acclimatize to that elevation and
then go back down and recover and then go
back up and acclimatize and then go back down.
It's a back and forth, back and forth. And
so our bodies are actually quite flexible in our
ability to acclimatize to different environments, but there are
limits, just like there are limits with adaptations as
well. And so I think when it comes to
climate change, I don't think we have the time
to physiologically, genetically adapt. Uh, OUR, our generation times
are not fast enough for us to be able
to do that. Certain, certain animals, organisms can bacteria
have very short generation times, so they can quickly
adapt to things, but humans can't. And so when
it comes to things like climate change, I think
our ability to acclimatize will be important, but I
think our approach to it culturally, behaviorally, and technologically
are going to be the keys to us making
it through, um, if we ever actually make it
through, if we do, it'll be because of those
things.
Right. So tell us now about your work with
reindeer herders in subarctic Finland. So, what are, what
aspects of their physiology and energetics have you focused
on?
Yeah, so it started out as kind of a,
a classic study looking at cold climate adaptations of,
you know, what might actually exist. Uh, COLD climate
populations have not been well studied since the 1930s
to the 1950s. There was a little bit of
it with, um, Doctors Josh Snodgrass and Doctor, uh,
Bill Leonard, both of whom I adore beyond all
belief and reason. Uh, AND they worked in Russia,
uh, with the Yakutia there looking at some cold
climate adaptation. As well, um, and then one of
their students, uh, Doctor Stephanie Levy has continued it,
but now, of course, no work is continuing in
Russia whatsoever. Uh, AND so that project's kind of
done. But I knew there was a gap, that
there was this big gap in our understanding of
cold climate adaptation. Um, AND I want to go
back to high altitude for a moment and that
there are 32 well studied populations for high altitude
and a third that's not quite as well studied,
but we're, we're definitely getting up there. Um, AND
we found a completely different suite of adaptations across
those three, and so even though they have the
same exposures, physiologically, evolutionarily, they, they went along different
routes and that's exactly how evolution works. It, it
takes the route it has available. There's no perfect
endpoint. Uh, AND so, you know, that makes you
wonder, is that gonna be similar across uh different
extremes. So can you expect different cold climate populations
to be adapted differently to cold, and we can't
answer that unless we have the data, which means
we have to work with more cold climate populations.
And so some of the typical things that we
see, if we just talk about body shape and
size and form, is typically in in cold climates
you see shorter and broader body shapes, and this
reduces the amount of surface area relative to body
mass, which means you lose less heat to a
cold environment. You see the opposite in hot, uh,
where individuals tend to be more narrow and tall,
that way they have tons of surface area and
they could dump all their heat to the environment
to, to keep their body temperature down. So in
cold we see short and kind of stout, uh,
and we also typically see greater muscle mass as
well as greater fat, uh, and actual adipose tissue,
and this is an insulative sort of property or
or so we think that it actually helps provide
extra layers from losing that internal body heat. Physiologically,
we see some interesting things as well. Uh, I'll
go into the ones that I don't study directly
and then the ones I do study directly. Uh,
BUT you see, uh, what's called the hunter response
or hunting response. And this is an oscillation in
your blood vessels between vasoconstrictions, so tightening up, and
vasodilation. So opening up. Uh, YOU vasoconstrict in order
to conserve heat, and then you vasodilate to make
sure you are getting blood to like your fingers
and toes so they don't fall off and die,
which is not what you want in any climate.
Uh, AND so you see this kind of oscillation
between vasoconstriction and vasodilation to both save heat but
keep the tissue alive. Um, SO that's one. You
see, shivering, we have all experienced shivering at some
point in our lives. That's not super effective in
producing extra body heat, but it can help. Uh,
AND then one of the things that, uh, or
two of the things as I say I'm very
interested in, uh, go down to the energetic. So
resting metabolic rate, Cold climate adapt or cold climate
populations on average can have 20 to 40% higher
resting metabolic rates than Than expected and compared to
folks from, say, temperate climates. And so their bodies
produce more heat because they lose so much more
to the environment. And then the other thing that
I'm interested in is brown adipose tissue, and this
is a kind of fat that burns only to
keep you warm. It's very mitochondria dense, and in
adults, it's located in the supraclavicular region. So for
folks at home, it's just right around your shoulder,
kind of between the tip of your shoulder and
neck. And um also along the major deep blood
vessels, which is not as easy to get to
in field work. Um, HUMAN babies are born with
it, like a cape down the front and down
the back since they do not have a mature
thermoregulatory system. And it used to be thought that
once babies burned through that, adults never had it.
And it is now, the more we look, the
more we see all over the place. Um, WE'VE
even found brown adipose tissue in a Samoan population,
which is a tropical population, and so it's entirely
possible that that brown fat is a pan-human, deeply
ancient adaptation, uh, which would be like, Kara, what
in the world are you saying? Humans evolved in
Africa, which is a hot, hot area, what in
the world. But in those in those regions, yeah,
it's hot during the day, but at night it,
it gets quite cold, uh, the temperature drops and
so brown adipose tissue could actually have been a
very important piece of anatomy to keep individuals warm
during the night. Uh, SO that's kind of the,
the big suite of things we see, and then
you can also dive down into to more specifics
like thyroid hormone as that relates to resting metabolic
rate. Your thyroid hormone kind of sets the thermostat
of your body. So typically if you have a
higher resting metabolic rate, you might have higher thyroid
hormone levels as well in cold climates.
So many different things to try to break down
here. Let me ask you a little bit more
about fat or um I, I mean, because you
mentioned brown adipose tissue there, but if I understood
it correctly, it's not just that, that people in
These more extreme colder environments have more brown adipose
tissue, but they also have more, uh, white adipose
tissue, right? To, to try to insulate them a
little bit more.
Exactly correct. And I, I also want to clarify
too with both brown, at least how we measure
it in the field so that people don't get
the, the wrong. Idea from it, but yeah, so
they do absolutely have more white fat. So think
of the subcutaneous fat that's under your skin all
over the body. Uh, COLD climate populations do tend
to have more of that than hot climate populations.
And then brown fat, at least with the field
methods we use because we're not putting people into
CT scans or PET scans, you know, in the
middle of the Arctic, um. We can't measure volume
of brown fat with our methods. Our methods involve
thermal imaging cameras and measuring metabolic rate during cold
exposure. So we can measure its activity. And we
see that in how things will light up warmer
where brown fat is compared to areas that don't
have brown fat, as well as an increase in
metabolic rate. And we, we try to keep those
cold exposures during the test. At like 12 to
15 째C, and for those who like Fahrenheit, it's
like 60 째F. So it's actually not cold cold,
but it's a mild cold enough temperature that your
body turns on brown fat but doesn't get you
to shiver. But if you start shivering, we don't
know if the metabolic rate is increasing because of
the shivering or because of the brown fat.
Yes, uh, and I wanted to ask you about
that specifically because, uh, we have this very common
idea and it's also at at the very least,
an oversimplification that white fat equals bad fat and
brown fat equals good fat. I mean, is there
any truth to that
or? I mean, it's a yes and no. Of
course. It's never as clear cut as people want
it to be. Um, AND so I, I, I
think another important thing that folks need to understand
is that fat, white fat, because it's very obvious
from what I'm saying that brown fat is active
and it burns calories and things like that. Like,
I think people understand that. But what I think
a lot of people don't really recognize is that
white adipose tissue, it is an organ, and it's
an organ that interacts with the rest of your
body. It produces hormones. It responds to hormones. And
so it's not this inner thing that you're just
carrying around. It's not just these extra energy packets
your body can use if it needs to. Uh,
IT, it does actually have an endocrine and physiological
function in the body, and we all have an
essential fat level, which means if you go below
a certain amount, your body doesn't work well. Everybody
needs fat to function properly. So as the good
versus bad, now that we know that fat actually
does have a purpose outside of just being an
energy pocket, um, it's actually a little bit more
about location than it is necessarily about the fact
that it's white or brown fat. You have subcutaneous
fat and you have visceral fat. The subcutaneous fat
is if you were to pull your arm and
you pinch at your skin, that's subcutaneous. That's the
stuff on the surface. The visceral fat is the
stuff that's under the muscle layer, particularly around the
abdomen, and it's in and around your organs. That's
the more dangerous fat because of that endocrine process
that goes on, the fact that it is an
endocrine organ. And that interacts, the more fat you
get, it does become an issue. You have this
constant chronic inflammation around the organs. And so white
fat inherently on, on its own is not bad,
but having more in one location is much worse
than having it in another location.
But even the white fat that we have surrounding
our internal organs, I mean, it's not good for
us to have too much of it, but we
need at least some of it to keep them
in place,
we need at least some of it, you know,
if, if you want to think about the bare
mini. Just to protect your kidneys. I mean, those
organs are hanging out between the pelvis and the
rib cage completely there for, for getting battered. And
so having a bit of a fat layer to
protect them is incredibly important. And you also have
an apron of fat that protects your, uh, intestines.
It's called the greater omentum. And so we all
have a certain amount of essential necessary fat that
your body needs to survive and Last any sort
of beating that it might take, but having too
much, just like having too much of anything can
can lead to problems, particularly in the visceral fat
when we're talking about that.
Mhm. So, uh, these reindeer herders, apart from these
more physiological metabolical aspects to them, do they have
any other ways of coping with harsh winter conditions
specifically?
They know what they're doing, Ricardo. It's like it's,
it's always very, very impressive to me when I
think about it, and it shouldn't be because of
course, like they've been living there for, you know,
millennia, of course they know what they're doing. Um,
SO what I find really great about the reindeer
herders is that they have this, this, they are
complete, you know, it's Finland, you know, this is
a first world country, really wonderful infrastructure, all of
that. Uh, AND so they have the things available
to them for the most part. But the reindeer
herders are really wonderful about incorporating modern technology and
knowledge into their traditional technology and knowledge. And by
traditional, I talk about the reindeer herders and in
particular the indigenous Sami of the region. And there
are Sami all the way from Norway, Sweden, Finland,
and in Russia as well. Um, AND usually the
Sami are very different from one end to the
other and Like Sami from Norway might not even
understand Sami from Russia, that the dialects are so
wide ranging, um, and so, you know, the reindeer
herders know in certain snow conditions it's better to
wear the reindeer skin boots, but in other snow
conditions it's way better to use the fancy Gore-Tex
boots that you bought at the store, uh, you
know, and depending if it's rain falling or ice
falling or snow falling, they would prefer a reindeer
skin coat or they would prefer, you know, The
typical again Gore-Tex code that you can get when
you ride a snowmobile, um, and so they have
a lot of great ways of incorporating different forms
of technology, uh, at many different levels to to
to maintain. Their body temperature and their health and
safety in these extreme environments. They're also very aware
of their environment. They are very, very knowledgeable about
the landscape. They're very knowledgeable about changes and what
those changes might indicate about potential dangers coming up.
Um. And they are very knowledgeable about how to
navigate all of that, and they know when to
say no. Like, right, conditions are getting bad. I'm
not going to push through because that's a deadly
decision in this kind of environment. They know when
to stop, they know when to hunker down, um,
and they're always good about having maps and GPS
units and things like that in case conditions really
deteriorate in the field. And so, yeah, they manage
it really, really well. And uh one of the
things that we're moving towards with this project is
trying to understand how they are navigating climate change
because the Arctic has, has witnessed climate change earlier
and more acutely than a lot of other places
in the world. And so they have watched their
landscape change. They have watched their weather patterns change,
and it's altering how their Occupation works now compared
to what it was 50, 100 years ago. And
so, uh, a new aim of this study is
trying to understand how climate change not only impacts
their occupation, but also their biology and how it
might be responding to a cold environment that is
no longer as cold as it used to be.
You know, when I read about your work on
the reindeer herders from Finland, one of the other
people that came to my mind, and I hope
I'm remembering their name correctly, are the Nexs from
northern Russia around the Siberia area because they also
sort of build most of their culture at least
their economy around reindeers,
right? Mhm. Yeah, and it's an interesting thing too,
of, of, again, the ways in which people are
accommodating modern times and changes is that, yeah, the
reindeer herders are still reindeer herders, but they've now
started incorporating a whole lot of tourism into their
business because reindeer herding is getting more expensive due
to climate change and supplemental feed and all of
these things. And so now they start running tourists,
uh. Kind of companies of you get to be
a reindeer herder for a day. So come out
to our reindeer herding farm and you can learn
how to be a reindeer herder. Uh, BUT they
will also supplement with forestry and mining jobs as
well, kinds of things. And so there are those
who do nothing but herding as a living, um,
and then there are those who are kind of
part-time herders as well as part-time other things.
Great. So, by the way, let me ask you
because this is another, probably another misconception that we
have to tackle here, these reindeer herders because they
have more fat in their bodies. If we were
to use uh or to calculate their body mass
index, wouldn't they be considered probably obese?
Yeah, uh, I literally gave a talk about this
last night. So that is on my mind. I
started with them all defining what is body mass
index and what do you know about it. Um,
YEAH, so at least with the herders I worked
with, so with with the group of folks that
I took measurements from 75% of them would be
classified as overweight or obese. Based on body mass
index. And, you know, as you know, and this
is why I'm sure you brought it up, is
that we all have these ideas about what your
body mass index means. And that if you fall
within this obese category, you are going to have
cardiovascular disease, you have an increased risk of diabetes,
stroke, cancers, depression, all of these various things that
people attach to this number. Body mass index is
purely your weight divided by your height squared. That's
it. It tells you nothing else about how your
body works or even what that weight is made
up of. Is it, are you 10% body fat
or are you 40% body fat? Those are very
different things and in the ways in which your
body works. Um, AND even body mass index when
it was developed historically by Adolfo Klay, he was
a statistician just interested in population means and finding
ways to describe body shape and size, and he
was explicit in his own publication that this should
not be used for health and determining health and
predicting health, and here we are, you know, basing
insurance premiums and, you know, whether or not somebody
might get a blood test based on BMI. Um,
BUT the interesting part about it, at least with
the herders, is that yes, that 75% of them
were overweight or obese, but their blood biomarkers, so
things like their cholesterol and all the different cholesterols
and their glucose looked really good. They did not
look bad the way one might expect given the
propensity for a high BMI in the population.
I mean, this is very interesting because, uh, I,
I mean, when a few years ago, I first
learned about BMI, one of the first things that
came to mind, but I guess I thought it
would be a little bit silly to ask the
question to a doctor because probably the, I, I
thought that probably they would make fun of me
is, uh, I mean, aren't Aren't there people who
have, for example, and this is just an example,
a very high muscle mass. And so if you
just calculate their BMI they would also be considered
obese, but that doesn't make any sense at all.
Yeah.
I mean, so, I mean, there's always the caveat
here to this example. But if you think of
modern day bodybuilders, if they aren't using steroids that
will destroy their health, this is the caveat. But
if you think of, you know, somebody who's 180
pounds and one's a bodybuilder and one never, you
know, lifts a finger ever, there's gonna be a
big difference in what that 180 pounds actually consists
of, whether it's fat or muscle. So that's absolutely
right. Uh, BODY mass index is not taken into
account body composition.
So, I, I mean, why is it that and
even in medicine, people still uh resort to BMI
so much? I mean, would, shouldn't they resort to
things like, I don't know, abdominal perimeter or something
like that? Isn't that a better health indicator than
just BMI by itself?
It's easy. BMI is easy. You need the person's
height and you need their weight, and you can
pop it into an online calculator or calculate it
on your phone. That's why it's an easy thing.
You are 100% correct comparing waist circumference to hip
circumference. That is a Much better metric because that
goes back to what we talked about before, is
that kind of lets you know how much visceral
fat someone might be containing holding versus the, uh,
subcutaneous. So if they have wider hips, that's more
subcutaneous fat. But if they have a larger stomach,
that's gonna be more visceral fat.
So, but I mean, do you think that, for
example, in Western populations that perhaps BMI would be
more or much better of an health indicator than,
for example, among uh reindeer herders because they have
this sort of physiological slash metabolical adaptation to those
kinds of extreme environments or not at all.
I don't, I don't think it's useful and you
know, the problem is we all end up having
to use it to some degree, but BMI, both
when it was initially created and then when it
was tested by Ansel Keys, it was created based
on studying males from Europe aged 18 to 30
who were in the military. That's not representative of
the global population, that's not representative of the Western
world, um. And then when Ansel Keys did it,
he tested 5 populations, 4 of which were your
your males from European descent, age 18 to 30,
and then one was a Bantu population from Africa.
Guess how BMI held up with the Bantu population.
It didn't. It didn't work. It didn't properly assess
body fat or any sorts of health indicators in
the Bantu population and An keys, it's just like,
yeah, whatever. It works for these four white folks,
so let's just continue along with it. And we
also know it doesn't work well in a Japanese
population. It typically tends to underestimate body fat in
a Japanese population. It tends to overestimate body fat
um uh among women and especially black women. And
so, in, you know, in, in the western world
in which we are a hodgepodge of people from
all over the globe, BMI I think keeps keeps
losing its importance, and I think we need to
move to a different metric, uh, to, to better
understand how an individual's health is.
And I was also thinking, and if this doesn't
make sense, please correct me, but isn't it also
the case that even within Uh, western countries, people
live in different kinds of environments and perhaps people
who live in very cold climates, even though they
might not get as cold as the climates where,
uh, reindeer herders live in, but still if they
live in the mountains, for example, that perhaps they
would also have more body fat, but they would
still be healthy.
Then absolutely there's a potential. I don't want there
to be a blanket that just because you carry
extra fat and cold, you're safe cause that's not
going to be true. Uh, ANYONE who gives you
blanket statements, always be aware they be worried that
there's always gonna be issues. Um, AND I mean
it does seem to be true at least for
now, among the the reindeer herder population and it
could well have been. True. Uh, WHEN you think
of North American cold climate populations, but the effects
of colonialism have been so drastic on North American
cold climate indigenous populations that that connection has been
completely broken between, you know, what would have been
healthy fat and a healthy metabolic profile that basically
doesn't exist anymore because the colonialist influences.
So just to try to make sort of a
segue between the topic of human energetics and the
topic of hunting, which will also, at least to
some extent include energetics here. Are there important sex
differences in human energetics or no?
There, there are and there aren't, um, and I,
I wanna say. Because my reindeer herders revealed a
wild sex difference that has never been seen before.
Um, WHEN it comes to energetics, there is males
on average tend to have a higher metabolic rate
than females. However, this is just largely due to
differences in size. Uh, SO your resting metabolic rate
correlates most or best with your fat-free masks. Or
you can think of it as your muscle mass,
but it also correlates well with overall body mass.
Males on average are larger than females and tend
to have more muscle mass, again, on average than
females. So, yeah, males have higher metabolic rates, but
once you start controlling for differences in size, there
isn't something innately male that makes the metabolic rate
higher. And so then the giant wrench thrown into
all of this is the reindeer that I worked
with, uh, so the females are on average 20
kg smaller than the males, which makes sense, like
that's, that's pretty standard. But they had higher metabolic
rates than the males, both relatively when you control
for differences in body size, but also absolutely higher,
so that even when you're not correcting for body
size, these much smaller females had higher metabolic rates
than the males, and that has never been seen
before and it's absolutely wild. When I saw the
numbers, I was freaked out and like this has
got to be wrong. But then we collected more
data in February 2023, and we, it just strengthened
the result that females did have higher metabolic rates
than the males. um, AND I think this might
relate in many ways to both uh better technology
but also climate change. Uh, THAT overall cold stress
is not as cold or stressful anymore in Finland
as the way it used to be, both because
of better technology and because of climate change. And
so we might start seeing greater variation in resting
metabolic rate with a with a trend downwards, um,
as time goes on. And I think females might
be more resistant to that change, or that change
might have to happen over a much longer period
of time than males, uh, because again, to go
back to this idea of resting metabolic rate and
thyroid hormone. Thyroid hormone sets the thermostat, kind of
sets your resting metabolic rate, but it is also
a critical hormone during the early stages of pregnancy,
that if an individual who is pregnant cannot increase
their thyroid hormone during the 1st 10 weeks of
pregnancy, that will very likely result in a miscarriage.
And so if you imagine a cold climate population
individual, they're operating at a higher baseline, uh, just
on their own. And then once they get pregnant,
they still have to elevate well above that baseline.
If that baseline starts shifting, the, the, the upper
amount that needed for pregnancy might not shift down
accordingly. And so that would put pregnancies, successful pregnancies
at greater risk of failure. Uh, AND So I
think females might be more resistant to that change
or slower to change in response to it in
order to, to maintain, um, reproductive capacity to some
degree. But we don't know. Um, WE, we measured
it in February of 2023, and we do see
higher T4, uh, levels among female herders compared to
all other groups that we've looked at. And so
we're gonna continue that for the next 3 years
to get a lot more data.
Do these average differences that you pointed to at
the beginning of your answer are correlate, are they
correlated in any way with hormonal differences, like, for
example, men on average having higher levels of testosterone
and women higher levels of estrogen. I mean, I'm
not. SAYING, uh, that it would have directly to
do with that because I'm not sure to what
extent, uh, hormones like testosterone or estrogen play a
role directly in metabolic rates, but perhaps indirectly through
producing, in the case of testosterone, higher muscle mass
and stuff like that.
You answered part of it already, which is exactly
that, that we sadly know far more about testosterone
and these things than we do estrogen. Uh, BUT
yeah, so it would be indirectly through, you know,
more muscle mass from testosterone and growth hormone as
well. Uh, THERE could also be an indirect effect
with estrogen because estrogen actually, uh, increases the number
of receptors for testosterone and growth hormones. So estrogen
has a positive effect on muscle increases. As well.
One thing that we are starting to at least
think we see, and this is not my work,
this is, uh, Edma Lanson out in Colorado, um,
that estrogen might have a big impact on brown
adipose tissue. That more estrogen might mean more brown
fat, uh, but that, that work is still ongoing,
but there is some indication that estrogen could have
a positive effect on brown adipose tissue. So that
would also increase metabolic rate.
So let's get into the contentious topic of hunting.
The amazing thing is that this should not be
contentious at all, but you know, here we are.
Well, well, let me just say that and we'll
come back to this point toward the end of
our conversation, but let me just say that. Uh,
I don't think that among, uh, anthropologists who take
the discussion seriously, it is that contentious. I mean,
they are mostly discussing some of the details there,
but I don't think that many people get that
riled up,
get riled so many feelings about this. Well,
I, I, I mean, let, let's see, let's discuss
that, but Uh, where the, just to introduce the
topic, where does this idea of man the hunter
comes from and where is it exactly?
Yeah, so I mean there's been a couple of
different formulations, but honestly I mean it even goes
back to the days of Darwin and Herbert Spencer,
you know, when you think it's not so much
the origin of Species, everyone knows about the origin
of Species, uh, but Darwin's second book, The Descent
of Man, uh, is where he started exploring in
particular, um, differences in Secondary sex characteristics. And so
the most common non-human example is the peacock. Male
peacocks have these crazy fancy tails, and they're very,
very colorful, whereas the peahen, which is the female
version of peafowl, um, are like brown and, you
know, quote unquote boring. And that's a big difference,
especially as a bird. If you are brightly colored
and you have to carry around this giant heavy
tail, that is a big eat me sign to
any predator. It's the kind of thing like why
would you do this evolutionarily, um, and you know
Darwin was talking about the ways in which this
would demonstrate, you know, a healthy individual that could
not only grow a fancy tail and pretty feathers,
but also evade predators, and that would be a
signal to a pea hen that this is someone
I might want to mate with. So he was
interested in sexual selection. Uh, AND that's kind of
a big chunk of what the descent of man
was about. And, you know, he recognized a lot
of it within the animal kingdom being female choice,
that it was females choosing males. But then that
disappeared in Darwin's kind of view once he started
talking about humans and that everything was more driven
by males rather than females. So it was this
kind of like very female dominant thing when it
comes to non-humans, but the moment we get to
humans, he switched it. And a lot of this
has to do with the Victorian ideals of the
time that he was living in, that, you know,
females were passive and submissive, and they should only
concern themselves with duties of the household, domestic duties.
And they are, they are not very intelligent, right?
Correct,
because why you don't need to be intelligent to
pop babies out. And you know, maintain the household
and in this Victorian view, uh, so for folks
at home, these are not my views. This is
a Victorian view, yeah, it's, yeah, I have been
quoted out of context before, of which I'm describing
Victorian views, and they are saying that that's what
I'm saying about women today. I'm like. Can you
read? Is that reading comprehension like, anyway, um, and
so yeah, and that all this innovation is driven
by males, and there's this kind of idea and
you know, Darwin even touches on it, but not
extensively, but even within our evolutionary past that it
was males developing the tools and the weapons that
are kind of the hallmarks of human evolution and
that these were specifically used for things like hunting
to provide for the family, um, and Even Darwin
and, you know, Herbert Spencer talking about these things
too, of that, like, it's always been about, they
have this idea that monogamy, that you have, you
know, female, male, isolated pairs within, you know, the
family unit, has a very deep origin in their
mind. And so that monogamy existed for quite some
time. Um, AND that it was hunting and tools,
and it was men using these tools to hunt,
to provide the meat and all of that, that
allowed us to be the humans we are today.
Yeah. And so that fit well within Victorian thinking
of, you know, the sexual division of labor and
and sex roles, uh, and that kind of continued
on and there's other things we could talk about
with that too, uh, but it became very formalized
within anthropology in the 1960s. So in 1966, uh,
Lee and Devore held a conference that was sponsored
by the Winter Gren Foundation called Man the Hunter.
And so I, I, I have been accused of
mischaracterizing Man the Hunter, and so I'm gonna be
much more specific about it when I, when I
talk about it in this context. Uh, BUT the,
the, the main goal of that man the Hunter
conference and then the edited volume that came two
years later was to kind of be a, a,
a review, a broad overview of what we know
about modern hunter gatherers at the time. So by
the 1960s, so not today today. Um, AND so
it was, you know, the majority of the chapters
were about modern hunter gatherers of the time, and,
you know, there was a little bit about sexual
division of labor and there was a focus on
hunting and some of them. But then there are
these three chapters a little bit later on in
the edited volume, uh, the big ones by, uh,
Washburn and Lancaster is one chapter, and then the
other chapters by Laughlin. They talk about the importance
of hunting to human evolution. And this is really
where the biggest issue, I, I think comes from
the man, the hunter idea, uh, and I know
Lee and Devore themselves kind of disagreed with a
lot of it, but they did edit the book
and OK those chapters to go into that book,
so they are not completely faultless here. Uh, BUT
these two chapters were very specifically hunting is the
reason that we are who we are today. All
of the features that separate us from, you know,
our, our nonhuman primate cousins, or chimpanzees, is because
of hunting. Uh, HUNTING required us to be highly
social, to coordinate it. So we also needed bigger
brains to be able to do that social coordination
and planning. Hunting also required really fancy tools to
be able to take down and prepare those animals,
which you also needed a big brain to be
able to do. And then hunting also needed you
to be physically strong and active and have a
lot of endurance to actually do the physical hunting
itself. And so the idea was, is that everything
that made us human was because of hunting, and
hunting was only done by men. That's the man,
the hunter kind of idea in a nutshell. Um,
AND that has persisted to this day is all
you gotta do is go on Twitter right now
and type in man the hunter, and you'll see
the freak out about people, the idea that women
may have hunted. Um, IT'S still very Persistent. It's
what I grew up with too. I, I mean,
if you think about the, the comic books, cartoons,
movies, TV shows, whatever, anytime you see the, the,
the prehistoric past depicted, it's men doing the hunting
and women are in the cave tending the fire
in the babies. That is the, the majority. And
there have actually been studies on this too, looking
at the percentage of who was doing what in
various depictions of human evolution. And it's the men
being active hunters and the female being passive caretakers.
But let me ask you this specific question. By
hunting, do they mean just, uh, hunting big game
or also small game? Because I guess that's an
important thing.
It's an
important
distinction, but here's the thing, Ricardo, which is amazing,
is that there was never a solid definition put
forward of hunting. In Man the Hunter. It's, it's
kind of defined in different ways and utilized in
different ways. And so there's a really interesting chapter
about the Ainu by Watanabe in the Man the
Hunter, and this is one like looking at the
modern hunter gatherers at the time and um these
are a group of indigenous folks in islands around
Japan and Women and men are hunting in the
Ainu, like they both are, and he even says
that in the chapter, but then he decides to
focus on the big game hunting only, and that's
only males doing it, ignoring the deer, which how
deer are not necessarily considered maybe medium game, but
that's still I would think larger anyway, um. He
decides to focus on big game hunting only as
as an important part of their culture and then
completely ignores the fact that women are hunting too,
and that even the majority of the hunting is
not big game hunting because that's not as reliable.
There aren't as many and it is much harder
to do and the success rate for big game
hunting is actually really low. It is the smaller
to medium game that's far more reliable resource, um,
and that everyone's kind of doing that, but it
gets ignored.
Yeah. So let me just ask you this before
we get into your set of papers on the
archaeological and physiological evidence for uh women also participating
in hunting. So, nowadays, uh, are there still many
people, anthropologists who work on hunting that claim that
all the hunting. Including small game is done by
men, or is that something that I already went
beyond.
I do not think that you could find and
maybe you can. Maybe I should be careful. I,
I don't think you should be able to find
anyone, you know, the behavioral ecologists who do a
lot of work with modern day hunter gatherers and
the, uh, you know, the ethnographers who do as
well. Women are doing small game hunting. By and
large, the vast majority of modern day hunter gatherers,
the big game hunting is done by men. This
is true and never anything that I refute whatsoever,
but that's not true for all modern day hunter
gatherers. It is not a universal. So there are
exceptions to that for sure, uh, but women are,
are well documented doing trapping, which some people don't
consider hunting, um, as well as hunting small game,
which some people for some reason don't consider hunting
either. They call it small game foraging, and I
don't fully unders. Stand that distinction, but whatever. Um,
SO yeah, by and large modern day hunter gatherers,
large game big game hunting is meant for males,
uh, and females can take part in large big
game hunting that we do see in some populations,
but they are also getting small game as well.
I mean, let me just laugh a little bit
because small small game foraging sounds sort of funny
because it sounds like women are still going out
there just to gather things,
just pluck these animals out of a tree like
an apple. Like, you know, it's, it's one of
those absurd distinctions that only serve the purpose of
trying to put big game hunting higher on a
hierarchy. They're trying to distinguish it as You know,
a better thing than, you know, the more reliable
resource that people can get. That's still hunting. I
don't, you know, let's go find the Daegu tree
or, you know, I need to pick Daegus and
eat them off of a tree. It's absurd. Sorry.
Um, I, I guess that small animals just get
mesmerized when they see a woman and they just,
they just let them beat them.
They just jump right in the basket. Please eat
me. Yeah.
Oh, OK. So let's get into your papers then.
So you present both archaeological and physiological evidence, uh,
that you suggest points toward women having perhaps a
higher participation in hunting than people have normally suggested.
So, could you walk us through the main points
there in when it comes to the archaeological and
the physiological evidence?
And so this is how I always wanna make
sure I set it up that like I just
said, modern day hunter gatherers, the majority, it's men
doing big game hunting. And what we were talking
about specifically within these two papers is looking at
the Middle Paleolithic. So we're talking like 11,000 years
to what, like, I don't know, 150,000 years kind
of thing. So deeper in the past. So we
are not talking about modern people here. Um, AND
we wanted to address both the archaeological evidence, which
is pretty unequivocal actually on this, uh, but also
one of the big things that Darwin and, uh,
Herbert Spencer, and then of course, going back to
Man the Hunter, Washburn, Lancaster and Laughlin, all of
that. One of their big contentions was that women
would not have been physically or physiologically capable of
carrying out hunting because of the demands of pregnancy,
lactation and child rearing, that they in a way
that women are considered handicapped and just incapable of
actually carrying out these tasks. And so we wanted
to address both of that from the archaeological record
as well as the physiological record to to to
to make sure we're talking about it. And so.
Which one do you want to hear about first?
Archaeology.
Let's go with the archaeological baby. So
the archaeological record is pretty great with this. And,
and, you know, what we do have, and you
always have to be careful with the archaeological record
because you are stuck with what you found, which
might not necessarily be representative of everywhere or even
throughout time there. The ways in which we figure
out people were hunting. So evidence that we look
for that hunting exists, period, is you look for
marks on animal bones that would indicate that they're
doing something. You look for stone tools that are
likely more or more likely to be used as
weapons rather than like, you know, a tool to
create a hole in skins or dig or things
like that. So, hunting tools, um, but then you
take a look at the signatures in the bones
of the people that we find. And there's some
very specific things that you can look for. One,
you can look at injury patterns to see what
kinds of injuries they're they're coming across on a
day to day basis or monthly basis or whatever.
And the other is use wear patterns. And so
the best way a modern example of a use
wear pattern is if I were to see an
X-ray of a tennis player, just looking at the
X-ray, I could tell you which arm was the
racket arm. Because that bone, the, the whichever side,
their humerus, the upper bone is going to be
larger and thicker than their non-racket side. And if
you take a closer look, you can also see
there's probably greater arthritis and larger muscle attachments on
the racket arm than on the non-racket arm. And
that's exactly the kind of thing that we can
see in the fossil record as well. We can
take a look at asymmetry between the left arm
and the right arm to see if they're doing
a certain motion over and over again. And then
we can use modern day records to see like,
right, we see these signs. If we see these
signs in a modern population, what activity is leading
to that? So if it's throwing or if it's
thrusting or if it's a bow and arrow, things
like that, we do have modern correlates to know
what those signs on the bones look like to
then see if we can find those signs on
the bones in our past in the middle Paleolithic.
And so, we see no difference in injuries or
you wear patterns between females and males in the
middle Paleolithic. They have the same injury rates, they
have the same injury patterns, and they have the
same use-war patterns, which means they were all doing
everything, both females and males in terms of day
to day activities. And when it comes down to
it, the only real true sexual division of labor
that exists and one that is inescapable is pregnancy
and lactation. But beyond that, There doesn't have to
be or need to be a sexual division of
labor, and it is very likely that in the
middle Paleolithic these human populations were too small to
have a sexual division of labor. They didn't have
enough people who could do different activities.
So we'll get more into that. Let me just
ask you at this point because I guess, uh,
I've already had discussions on some of the issues
surrounding archaeological records on the show. For example, when
it comes to the evolution of warfare in human
societies, that's a very big one. So for, just
to give an example, Steven Pinker in one of
his books presents evidence from what seems to be
a diverse set of. Societies across the globe that,
that would point to higher rates of violence in
traditional societies versus more modern industrialized societies. But then
Brian Ferguson went back and criticized basically all of
those sites. So, in this particular case, let me
ask you, how diverse is the set of, uh,
archaeological records or remains that we have to really,
uh, establish. uh, THE claims.
Yeah, it's a hard one. And I mean, I'll
be honest, and this is true with any fossil
record is we are left with what we're left
with. And so you're not going to get thousands
upon thousands of individuals to do this big broad,
you know, meta-analysis. We have what we have. What
we have, if it is truly representative, females are
doing the same things that males are, and males
are doing the same things that females are. Um,
ONE of the really best indicators, and now I
can't remember the number off the top of my
head, um, but looking at teeth in particular. Tall
teeth. Uh, Neanderthals and modern humans totally interbred. We
all have a little bit of Neanderthal in us,
and I, I kind of consider them the same
species cause by species definition, you have to be
able to reproduce and make offspring who can also
reproduce. And we clearly did that. And so I
don't see that as two different species. Um, THEY
had a very interesting way of preparing animal hides
in which they would put, they would hold one
end of the hide in their mouth with their
teeth and then stretch it out with one hand
and then use the free hand to like scrape
sinew off the hide. And you got this very
weird dental pattern from it where like the fronts
of the teeth kind of like jut off at
an angle because of the wear from the hides.
And there's this massive sample of teeth and you
could not separate people who did or did not
do all of the leather preparation that way. They
were all doing it. Everybody. And that was a
mixed sample of males and females, and you couldn't
clearly say these were the hide prepares and these
weren't the hide prepares. And I use this as
a specific example. Because traditionally, in the idea of
man the hunter, hide preparation was a domestic female
duty and not something males did, but we see
evidence for males doing hide preparation among males, um,
as well as females. Uh, AND so what we
have indicates. No sexual division of labor until we
start pushing it around 35, 40,000 years ago, we
start seeing a little bit more throwers elbow in
males than in females. Females still show it, but
there is a greater preponderance in males. Uh, BUT
we don't see an explosion of evidence, uh, for
sexual division of labor until around 11,000 years ago
when populations got bigger. And more sedentary, where you
could actually have enough people to split up the
duties between different things, hunting, um, and also when
you have a more sedentary population to go back
to energetics, you're not expending as many calories from
day to day. So they likely may have been
able to increase the reproductive output as well during
that time, which means females may have been more
settled with pregnancy and lactation if they're having children
at a faster pace than they had, you know,
in previous generations.
So 11,000 years ago, are we already talking about,
at least in certain places, Neolithic societies or
yeah, moving into that age and you know, agriculture
starts being a bit of a thing, uh, and,
and it really seem to be the advent of
sedentism, not moving from place to place, and agriculture
and a lot of that does have to kind
of go together, uh, that enabled the sexual division
of labor to take root and was probably beneficial
if you think of beneficial as producing more babies.
Mhm. So tell us now then about the main
points that you see coming from the physiological evidence.
Yeah, so this is the thing that of course
we wanted to address because, you know, everyone saying,
well, men are stronger and faster. I am not
here to tell you that there are not average
sex differences in speed and strength. That is absolutely
true. There is overlap. There are going to be
females who are well within the male range and
males well within the female range. There is a
distribution with overlap, um. What I'm telling you is
that the idea of maximal speed and maximal strength
actually do not play a role in in in
hunting like at all. Uh, HUNTING was much more
of a long slog than it was anything else
when you think of persistence hunting, um, and even
still, humans are kind of weak. I, I, I'm
not, I'm not lying here like in the end
we're we're pretty slow. And we're pretty weak and
we're pretty fragile. And really the only way that
we were able to hunt period was through cooperation
and tools. It was through our brains and our
innovation that we were actually able to make hunting
possible to begin with. We found ways to overcome
our quote unquote natural weaknesses as a species period.
And to think that females could not also do
that is just Outlandish in my mind, uh, but
that aside, females are interestingly physiologically better suited for
endurance activity. Males are physiologically, again, all this on
average, better suited for like strength power sorts of
activities, quick bursts, uh, and I think this all
goes back to pregnancy as pregnancy. And lactation is
basically one big long endurance event for a female.
You're spending a lot of extra calories every single
day and your body has to accommodate that. And
if you think about our evolutionary past, not only
accommodate that, but accommodate the daily tasks you need
to complete in order to survive. Um, AND so
a lot of this relates to estrogen. Estrogen is
a critically important hormone for endurance activity. It's a
critically important hormone period that people did not get
enough respect to, um. We can't date how old
hormones are, but we can get a date on
the receptors based on the genes for those receptors.
So estrogen receptors and androgen receptors. The estrogen receptor
is twice as old as the testosterone receptor, and
the testosterone receptor is actually from a duplication of
the estrogen receptor. And the estrogen receptor itself seems
to predate sexual reproduction entirely. And it became this
critical hormone just for natural functioning physiology. Your heart
needs it, your muscle needs it, your brain needs
it. Basically, every organ in your body responds to
estrogen, which is why you find estrogen in everybody.
It is not the female hormone and testosterone is
not the male hormone. Everyone has both. Um, AND
I think it's also interesting that we see androgen
insensitivity disorder, where folks can produce estrogen, but they
don't have the receptors for it, and they live
life just fine. But you don't see estrogen insensitivity
disorder. There have been 5 documented cases and it's
only for one of the minor estrogen receptors. There
are lots and lots of estrogen receptors and there's
some big main ones. You don't see estrogen insensitivity,
estrogen insensitivity disorder in the main estrogen receptors, because
I, I firmly believe that would be incompatible with
life given how much of the body's natural physiology
relies on estrogen functioning. Uh, BUT in the end,
the things that it does for endurance to bring
it back, sorry, I. I want to educate everyone
on estrogen, and anyone who is listening or watching
this who is perimenopause or menopausal, talk to your
doctor about estrogen replacement therapy. It is completely safe
within certain realms. Make sure that's why you talk
to your doctor, and it's going to make your
life so much better if you can go on
estrogen replacement therapy. Um, IT'S been, you know, vilified
for so many years and testosterone replacement therapy has
been used all the time. Um, SO please talk
to your doctor. But estrogen in itself, it does
a few things. Um, ONE, estrogen can increase the
amount of fat that your body uses, particularly during
Endurance. And fat is your better endurance fuel. You
get 9 calories per gram of fat relative to
4 calories per gram of carbs, and so you
get more energy that actually takes longer to burn,
which means you're staying at a more consistent level
of energy output. Then in then you deal with
carbs, so you have kind of this ebbs and
flow, you think of a sugar crash. That's an
extreme example, but that is kind of a way
to think about this. Um, FAT burning allows you
to burn longer and it can delay fatigue that
way too. So females preferentially burn more fat than
males do at basically all levels of endurance. And
an interesting thing is females typically have more estrogen
receptors on their skeletal muscle, so the muscles used
for running. And it's also been found that elite
endurance male athletes also have more estrogen receptors on
their skeletal muscle. And we don't know if that's
a training effect that your body can respond and
actually produce more, or if it's a self-selection, like,
and when they were younger, they found out they
were really good at running and it turns out
they're really good at running because they have more
estrogen receptors on their muscles. We do not know
the answer to that question at this point. Um,
SO estrogen helps with fat burning, which can help
delay fatigue. Estrogen also reduces the amount of damage
incurred during extreme levels of physical activity, or really
any physical activity. It helps protect cell membranes from
being ruptured during heat stress and exercise stress. Um,
AND so females take less damage, as well as
have a faster recovery, not only because of the
less damage, but estrogen also seems to help improve
recovery, uh, of muscle. It also turns out it
might be super helpful in recover. FROM traumatic brain
injuries, as well as potential cardio, uh, cardiac events.
People are looking into this now if you need
to have estrogen on hand in like emergency rooms
to give to folks experiencing a major cardiac event
or a traumatic brain injury, because it could potentially
help improve recovery in those situations. Um, SO those
are some of the main ones. The estrogen is
a big one. Adiponectin is another important hormone that
increases the amount of estrogen, or I'm sorry, increases
the amount of fat that is being burned during
any given time. Um, FEMALES also tend to have
for whatever reason. A better like psychological mental pacing.
When, when at least when we look at marathons,
when we look at half marathons and we look
at marathons, females are able to maintain a more
consistent pace, whereas males kind of drop off in
pace, they start out at faster speed and then
they slow down more than females do. We don't
know why. Uh, WE, we don't know if there's
if, if it's some like it could be a
mental thing of like I know I need to
pace myself, or it could be this sort of
innate thing of like, I know I've got And
I'm anthropomorphizing physiology at the moment. Like, I know
I've got 26 miles to go, um, and so
my body is gonna naturally fall into a pace
in which I know I can maintain a decent
speed to get this done as efficiently as possible.
We don't know. Uh, AND, and so that's another
thing as well, that's, that's really interesting. Um, AND
then females also have more slow twitch muscle fibers
than fast twitch. Uh, THE slow twitch muscle fibers
are your endurance fibers. That's what you see. And
in marathon runners tend to have more fast twitch
muscles, which males have more of. I, I call
the power lifting muscles. That's sort of quick short
bursts of speed and power. Um, THERE'S, of course,
overlap. Elite female weightlifters have a ton more type
2 fast twitch muscle fibers. And so we do
see a lot of variation in that.
OK, so then let me just ask you to
sort of quick questions before I get into uh
a commentary on your paper on physiological evidence. So.
The first one is, uh, how does this physiological
evidence translate them into hunting? Why do you think
that it supports, uh, higher levels of hunting for
women than people tend to agree on?
It addresses the argument that females would not have
been physically capable of taking part in hunting. Uh,
AND, and that is why that there, there's this
idea of innate female frailty, physiologically and physically, that
they couldn't put up with the rigors of hunting
because of pregnancy and lactation and things. LIKE that.
And the, the thing is is that we see
females hunting. Uh, THE Agta are a wonderful example
of this. It's a, it's a traditional hunter gatherer
population in the Philippines. Females hunt while they're pregnant
and they hunt pretty quickly after they give birth
as well. They'll even take the kids on hunts
with them, um, and Talk to, I don't mean
actually talk to, but if you take a look
at any female outside of humans, there isn't food
provisioning from other animals. Females in the wild have
had to maintain getting food, whether it's hunting like
a lion does or whether it's gathering like, you
know, any nonhuman primate does. They have had to
be pregnant and they've had to lactate, and they've
had to care for kids while also getting all
of the food for themselves and their kids, um.
We have that innate physiology as well. There isn't
something special about human females in which we suddenly
become physiologically weaker that we cannot provide for ourselves
and our offspring. Uh, AND so this addresses that
concern particularly that there's some physical and physiological barrier
that females cannot go past to actually take part
in hunts. Mhm.
And so, what is then, I would like to
ask you to tell us what is then the
exact argument that you're making on the basis of
all these archaeological and physiological evidence. I mean, is
it just that women also hunted? Is it that
women hunted in higher rates than people tend to
believe? Is it that women also hunted? Big game.
What is the precise argument?
Yeah, I'm, I'm gonna scooch back. I'm gonna, I'm
gonna go to the big game hunting first just
because this was not a thing I had mentioned,
going back to the injury patterns. Um, ONE of
the best studies out there which also got misrepresented
in the media horribly, um, was looking at the
injury patterns and rates among Neanderthals, females and males,
and they found that the injury patterns and rates
best corresponded with uh rodeo clowns. And what a
rodeo clowns do, but distract large angry animals from
destroying a rodeo rider, uh, you know, during a
rodeo event, and this was interpreted as not Neanderthals
were riding wooly rhinoceroses. That's how it got misrepresented
in the media, but that Neanderthals were up close
and personal with the big game they were hunting.
They relied on like spear thrusting. And so we
saw that among females as well as males. And
so another key thing I wanna say in is
if you believe the evidence for hunting among males
in the Middle Paleolithic, then you have to believe
females were hunting as well. This is the exact
same evidence. There is literally no difference. So if
you are convinced males were hunting in the Middle
Paleolithic. And you are not convinced that females are
hunting in the middle Paleolithic. That's a deep, deep
bias because it's all based on the exact same
evidence, um, and so I absolutely believe that females
were taking part in big game hunting. I am.
100% unwilling to make any comment on rates. How
often and how regularly, even males were doing this,
to be quite honest. That's a really hard thing
to determine from the archaeological record. Um, AND so
how often were they doing big game versus small
game versus fishing versus trapping? That's a very hard
thing to put numbers on, and I am uncomfortable
doing that. I am also uncomfortable saying females were
doing it more or less than males. I'm sure
there were periods of time that female Stopped hunting
because they were too pregnant, or they had to
stick around during, you know, the first, you know,
2 months during, you know, breastfeeding for a brand
new infant. I'm sure, but that's also very true
for males who were sick or injured. They would
not have been able to take part in hunting
during those periods of time. And so I think
there's an ebb and a flow in an individual's
lifespan during which there's larger peaks of hunting, a
higher rate of hunting, and then lower rates of
hunting. Uh, BUT I am never comfortable putting an
actual number to that.
OK. But then when it comes to that, to
that last point, uh, at least, uh, there, there's
some space here for people who come from the
other side to say then that perhaps still men
hunted in higher rates than women. I, I mean,
I'm not. THAT you would
have, they can say that. I don't, I don't
think I have to accept that claim because it's
a bit absolutist. Like, they can make that claim,
they absolutely can, and it could be right and
it might be wrong, but based on the fossil
evidence we have, we can't make that determination. Um,
THE best you can do is look at, you
know, modern hunter gatherers today and say, look at
The rate of hunting in males and then project
that onto the past. But already, we, we, we
see that the fossil evidence doesn't mesh up with
that because of the injury rates with big game
hunting, the rodeo rodeo clown study, that demonstrates females
were up close with the big game and hunting
them. So you can't discount that, and you can't
accurately project what we see today onto the past.
OK, so let's get then into a commentary that
I read on your paper, Woman, the Hunter, the
physiological evidence. This was by Melanie Martin at all.
Uh, THE title of their paper is Can or
their commentaries, Can Women Hunt? Yes. Did women Contribute
much to human evolution through endurance hunting, probably not.
And, uh, one of the, uh, first claims that
they make, I mean, one of the first commentaries
that they make is that, uh, at a certain
point in your paper, uh, it seems that you
say that, uh, some of the, the idea of
evolved gendered subsistence activities would derive mostly or largely
from Uh, assumptions that are extrapolated from patriarchal norms
today or rationalizations of implicit male superiority. Uh, AND
then, uh, they quote that and then they res
or the reference literature that point to a near
universality of gendered divisions of labor. So what do
you make of that?
Yeah, so I absolutely agree that there are some,
not I wouldn't, there are some populations that have
a very strict sexual division of labor and most
populations actually have a good deal of flexibility in
what the the gender divisions of labor are, uh,
but there are some where it is only big
game hunting are males and males alone. Never once
do we contend that modern day hunter gatherers do
not have a majority of males doing the big
game hunting. We accept that. That's the data, uh.
That's not the data we see for the middle
Paleolithic. It's just not. Uh, IF that were the
case, we wouldn't see the same injury rates and
we wouldn't see the same you wear patterns on
female skeletons and male skeletons as best as we
can estimate it. And so I don't disagree with
him that that that's true for, you know, the
here and the now for the most part, not
all. But it's not what we're seeing in the
past, and so you, you cannot be blinded by
the population that you work with and expect them
to be this paragon of what Paleolithic life was
like. That is a false equivalency. If that were
the case, then they should also be arguing that
dogs were domesticated 70,000 years ago because people use
dogs in modern hunter gatherer society societies today to
hunt. We know that's not true based on fossil
evidence, and so I, I always have a hard
time understanding why there's that disconnect with people when
it comes to women hunting because the fossil evidence
shows it and you wouldn't deny the fossil evidence
for dog domestication, so why are you denying the
fossil evidence for women hunting in the past?
So, I, I, I mean, let me address this
right away. So one of the claims that you
make, at least one of the claims is that
we can't really rely too much on contemporary traditional
societies because they might not be representative of ancient
traditional societies from the Paleolithic.
Right. Absolutely, and you know, this is something that
People are getting a lot better about it now,
but even in the very recent past, people would
treat these traditional societies almost like living fossils that,
you know, they haven't changed and they're intervening 70,000
years or 50, whatever. And, you know, that's just
some racist bullshit right there. So I, I don't
know if you're allowed to swear, but it is,
it is, it's just a bullshit, um. That doesn't
mean that we can't learn amazing things from traditional
populations and come up with ways of generating questions
and hypotheses based on their behavior to then test
the fossil evidence. Like, right, we see this happening
in modern day hunter gatherers. What signals might we
look for in the fossil evidence that might indicate
a similar behavior in the past? And if it
matches great, then we can line those things up.
But if it doesn't match, that's also kind of
great and We needed to figure out why it
doesn't match and in what ways it doesn't match.
Um, AND so, you know, that's one of the
real issues I had with that commentary is that
it didn't address the whole second half of our
argument. It only looked at one, and you need
both pieces to actually understand what's going on. Um,
AND the fact of the matter is, is that
the fossil record as we have it now, and
if evidence comes out and we get a bunch
of bones from the middle Paleolithic showing females weren't
hunting, great, I'll change my tune. But at the
moment that's not what it is. The evidence shows
they were hunting, um, and you have to bring
those two together to to make a complete picture
and have a this kind of goes back to
your original question of like. You didn't say it
this way, but who cares and you know, why
do we care about this? And part of it
is because of our reconstructions of the past have
been faulty and they've been faulty for a really
long time. And you know, the moment you take
up a uh uh uh you Google human evolution,
you're gonna see that classic picture of a male,
you know, evolving from a chimpanzee up to, you
know, modern day human, and you're going to see
males doing the hunting and all of those things.
We need to reassess how we reconstruct the past
to get a better and more complete picture of
what our ancestors were doing on a daily basis.
Yeah, and definitely this point about people having to
be careful when they try to extrapolate from contemporary,
uh, traditional societies hunter gatherers, or horticulturalists and so
on from those two more ancient. In traditional societies
is something that I've already talked about on the
show several times, probably the first time was with
Doctor Robert Kelly about his book The Lifeways of
Hunter-gatherers, because he really drives that point
there it is.
I really, really love that book and the book
is fantastic, and he even talks about women hunting
too and doesn't discount it, which, you know, kind
of blows my mind when people who study modern
day hunter gatherers like read Robert Kelly. I'm like,
I've read Robert Kelly and he seems cool with
the idea of women hunting.
No, I, I really love that book and I
can't recommend it enough. And also, if people are
interested, please go and watch that interview as well.
So, but just for them to keep that point
in mind. But then another thing that they say
in this commentary is that Uh, the review and
reconstruction of women's evolved physiological capabilities is overly reliant
on data from Western industrialized populations. So, what would
be your reply to that?
Yeah, and I mean it's true and you know,
part of the problem is that's what we've got
to work with, um, which is, which is also
true and in trying to understand populations with high
levels of energy expenditure, but we aren't also we
aren't doing it willy nilly. We aren't doing it
without good reason and rationale. And one of them
is that, you know, studies of bones demonstrate levels
of physical activity on par with modern day Western
athletes. Mhm. And, and so we see this connection
between the types of tasks that they are doing
that have at least correlates with modern day physiology.
And that's also part of the issue is we
don't get a lot of physiology from the fossil
record. Sometimes we can get some cool biomarkers from
bones, but, you know, overall, we, we can't know
fully what the physiological profile of the, of our,
of our ancient past was. Um, AND so, yeah,
I get it. I take. That critique, and it's
absolutely true. Um, AND it's just as fair to
say, well, like, why can't I use modern day
hunter gatherers and but you can use modern day
athletes. I get it. And that is a fair
point. Um, I'm trying to understand the underlying physiological
mechanisms that enable high levels of endurance, that enable
things like pregnancy as well as gathering. This this
is one thing that really truly upset me with
that commentary is. Again, this idea that hunting, and
we are very explicit about this in our papers,
that hunting actually was not all that important, especially
in the early parts of our, of our evolutionary
trajectory. We were gatherers to begin with. And when
we started eating meat, we were scavengers. We picked
off other animals kills. Um, HUNTING didn't become important
until much, much later. And even still, we see,
you know, in hot climate populations, there's usually a
majority of calories are coming. From plant materials, things
that are gathered rather than meat. That changes the
higher latitudes because there's less plant matter. Um, BUT
there's this idea that gathering is easy, and it's
not. Uh, PARTICULARLY in the dry areas when we
think about where humans evolved, digging up tubers with
a pointed stick, digging is one of the most
metabolically demanding activities you can do. Like, even more
than running, digging is harder than running. And so
that it minimizes the physiological demand of gathering, um,
while trying to say females are physiologically incapable of
hunting because of pregnancy and lactation that there must
be some sort of limit on that because of
pregnancy and lactation. Like no, gathering probably takes just
as many if not more calories than hunting does.
So another claim that they make, and this is
not directly about, I guess, any of the claims
you make there, but it's more about the, your
methodological approach. They say that You do not follow
the typical structure of a scientific study because they
say you do not state any falsifiable hypothesis or
predictions to answer a specific research question, but basically
that your paper is more focused on underscoring. The
reasons why the original interpretations of male biased hunting
are wrong while attempting to demonstrate how flawed the
patriarchal view is. Do you agree with
their table? Because they review paper. It even says
so here we review. This was never ever, ever
meant to be a hypothesis-driven paper or an experimental
paper. It's more of a theoretical paper and a
review of papers, theoretical slash review papers that not
only lay out the abundance of evidence, both archaeologically
and physiologically, but also provide a lot of future
directions and where we need to go. That we
can better test these things. So that's a misreading
on their part because we literally say these are
review papers in the papers themselves. And so, yeah,
I don't really know how to take that one,
because I, I don't know, I kind of laughed
at it a little bit. I won't lie. And
if they listen to this, they're probably gonna be
upset, but their review papers. Sorry guys, I. Well,
and that's I think I was gonna say, but
I think that's also a really important point, is
that all of this data has been in existence
for quite some time. Some of the fiddler physiology
stuff is relatively new, but like the data on,
you know, hunting in the fossil record, that's been
around for a while and it's taken us, and
it's not just us, and, you know, there's there's
a whole history of feminist anthropologists who have looked
at this as well, um. Which also goes to
show that we've been talking about it and talking
about it since the 70s, and we're still having
to come back to it and, you know, fight
these stereotypical assumptions that it's males doing the hunting
when there's clear fossil evidence against it. Um SO
it's not new data, which makes it even more
frustrating that this is so contentious.
Yeah. And, and I mean, just to be fair
and, uh, just for people to not get very
ups very upset with all of these later this
year, I will also have on the show Dr.
Vivek Venataram and then it comes from the other
side of this discussion. So, and so
he even, he even says women hunt. He says
they hunt in a fundamentally different way, but he
finds them hunting, and so I honestly do not
understand why he has an issue with an idea
of women doing big game hunting in the Paleolithic
when the fossil evidence actually demonstrates it. I, I
don't really know why that is a hill he
has chosen to, uh, to defend.
Anyway, uh, since I mentioned him, because in one
of his recent papers, Woman the hunter, female foragers
sometimes hunt, yet gender divisions of labor are real.
That's the title. He makes a claim that Melanie
Martin also makes in her, uh, commentary to your.
Paper that is, um, they basically say that that
you pres uh the ideas you present in your
paper are rooted in assumptions that hunting is a
superior, more desirable activity, even explicitly explicitly stating that
women are relegated to mothering and
this is where we were completely and utterly misquoted,
and I could not believe they said that. So
that sentence that they quote me on. It was
literally a summary of a paragraph from Man the
Hunter. And so there's a direct quote from Man
the Hunter in our articles of them saying men
are superior da da da da da, and I
summarize it in more plain language in the quote
they quote me on there, somehow making it my
words and beliefs that females are inferior. I, I
was blown away by by that because it's just.
It's a misreading, and I don't know how it
could be a misreading because the quote is right
there in the paper followed by the summary, and
it just that felt incredibly disingenuous cause that's not
a quote of my thinking and it's very clearly
a summary of the quote from Man the Hunter.
So they can say that, but we were also
very explicit about how there is an Oversized emphasis
on meat and hunting in anthropological literature when it's
never actually the main source of calories in most
populations unless you move to more higher latitudes. And
so, I can't tell you why they said that
and why they plucked that quote completely and utterly
out of context, but there we are.
So you're not claiming at all that hunting is
a superior activity to mothering and gathering.
No, not at all. Damn. I am saying that
is what man the hunter said, but you know.
Well, uh, let's get into another point that they
make here. So this is a more complicated one,
but basically, they argue that, uh, the aspects of,
uh, reproductive fitness, that the sort of physiology that
you explore in your paper, you, you, I, I
mean, that you do not consider what uh aspects
of this, uh, why they would have been selected
for or what they would. They've been selected for
and what the energetic costs and benefits are to
women engaging in hunting versus the myriad other behaviors
that enhance their reproductive fitness. And so, basically, they're
making a point about energy allocation, right?
So. Um, SO I think part of this comes
from the framework in which they were both educated
and that they've continued as academics, and it is
this behavioral ecology framework that organisms do what they
can to maximize their reproductive fitness, so produce as
many babies as possible. Um, AND so it's like
an optimization idea and I will be very, very
honest that that is not something that is not
a theoretical framework I ascribe to in any way.
I find the idea of optimization in an extremely
dynamic and Predictable environment to be kind of biologically
absurd. uh, IF you optimize yourself for in one
circumstance you're likely screwed for the next change in
circumstances because you've optimized and adapted yourself into a
corner. Um, SO I, I, I don't describe to
that period that what we're doing is always towards
maximizing reproduction. Um, IF that were true, we wouldn't
see, you know, 4 to 6 year birth intervals
and even traditional reproducing populations. They're not popping babies
out every year. They're just not doing it. Um,
AND so that would not be maximizing fitness even
in modern day hunter gatherers today. But also this
goes back again to that, you know, this idea
that females would be physiologically, energetically incapable of doing
it because of the cost of pregnancy and lactation.
And I will say again, talk to every other
mammal female on this planet. They have to. Be
pregnant, have to lactate, have to take care of
their offspring, and they have to get the food.
They have to survive. Survival is going to take
precedence over reproduction for the vast majority of animals.
There are those, I mean, we see it with
what is it, kawakas. I believe it's Kawaka. I
know this is a side note, but I find
it hilarious, uh, but like the first sign of
danger, kawaka like abandoned their babies and run away.
It's just like it's better for me to stay
alive and reproduce another day than to take care
of these little, you know, these little hungry monsters.
Um, YOU have to survive and you know, survival
is going to be the key here and if
you think again about the Middle Paleolithic, we're working
in small groups, um. And females would have had
to partake in gathering and in hunting males would
have had to partake in gathering and in hunting
just to get enough food to make it through.
Uh, YOU wouldn't have enough people that we likely
didn't have the, the kind of storage technology to
keep food for long periods of time the way
we do now, so they likely had some, um.
That it was like a day to day thing
to keep yourself alive. And so they absolutely had
to do it. And this is what we see
even today among mammals. Talk to any single mom.
Tell her that she can't work and get the
job done while also taking care of her kids.
She gets it done. Um, AND so I think
that's a very myopic view of reproductive physiology and
what female capacity is broadly within mammals.
But wait a minute, with that, with that example
of that animal you reference there, are you claiming
that evolution is not primarily or more importantly about
reproduction? I mean, because I would imagine that, oh,
OK, I, I have already reproduced, so let me
just lay down here.
You can't have babies if you're dead. You can't
if if we want to think about a maximization
and optimization of fitness, which, you know, leading to,
you know, maximization of optimization of offspring, which I
don't believe, you can't do that if you're dead,
and you can't do that if you are starving.
You cannot reproduce unless you have enough calories to
begin with, so you have to acquire that food.
So another point that they bring to the table
is that, uh, I mean, taking into account all
of what you just said earlier, this now sounds
a bit weird, but we should first consider the
costs and benefits of hunting as a subsistence and
reproductive, reproductive strategy and then evaluate this relative to
pull energy budgets model from extant foraging. Societies, I
mean, but isn't this something that you also mentioned
earlier
that. Yeah, absolutely, and I, I mean that's the
thing is like we can get these numbers of
what pooled resources is. I think it's a, it's
a, it's a harder connection to make in some
ways because modern day. Hunter gatherer populations live in
much larger groups than what we see as average
group size in the middle Paleolithic. That's very different.
You can have pooled resources. They have the technology
to keep things prepared and trade and all of
that. Humans were in much smaller groups and usually
much more um. What is the word I'm looking
for like widely distributed across land, like not necessarily
close to one another to do these things. There
was trade and we clearly have evidence, but it
was not as quick and easy as what we
see relatively for for today. And so yeah, I
think we could absolutely get some really interesting data
as well as generate. New questions and hypotheses from
these kinds of things from modern hunter gatherers, and
it'll likely provide very important insights for our evolutionary
past, but we cannot consider it a mirror for
our evolutionary past, especially when the fossil evidence negates
this idea that females weren't hunting.
OK, so this point will probably be a little
bit repetitive, but let me just ask you directly,
uh, because they mention also the fact that since
uh females get pregnant, the, the way they reproduce
compared to men would favor less risky and less
energetically demanding subsistence tasks. So.
I mean, I, I can't say no, that's not
true because there is risk. But again, I will
go back to the fossil record in that you
might have to take that risk in order to
have food and in order to eat. And by
the rates and patterns of injuries on what we
believe to be female bones, they were taking those
risks. And there's also this idea, I, I, I,
I get concerned that female, that in this, in
their reconstruction, females are always pregnant or lactating. But
we know that to not be the case. There's
usually a lag time between when a female first
becomes reproductively viable, like they could actually have offspring,
to when they actually start having babies. And then
there's a lag time in between babies. Females are
not popping out children constantly. There's gonna be an
ebb and flow. To that. And so again, there
will be periods of time in which, yeah, they
might not want to risk that behavior, uh, whether
they are recently pregnant or very, very pregnant and
about to pop. But again, the evidence suggests they
were taking those risks, and it means there must
have been a really big benefit to them to
take those risks and incur those injuries.
So, uh, another point is that, and this is
sort of, or in a way related to the
earlier point about uh data from Western, modern Western
industrialized societies. They say that. Um, ALL of the
physiological research that you reviewed comes from studies of
non-pregnant women athletes in highly industrialized settings. So, is
that right? And if so?
We don't exactly have data on pregnant athletes. I
mean, yeah, they're right. And that's kind of the
nature of the data. That's kind of what we're
left with to work with at this point. And
even sadly still, that data that we work with,
there's even not that much among female athletes. We
have so much more on male athletes, um, And
I've yet to see any of them criticize the
use of male athletes and trying to understand hunting.
So you know there's there's again a bit of
a bias going on there as well, and they
bring up the point about estrogen levels too, of,
you know, Western populations have much higher estrogen levels
than we see in other parts of the world.
Yeah, that is true, but here's the thing is
that everybody operates within their natural range of estrogen.
If we were to compare the estrogen levels of,
you know, me, for example, compared to somebody from
a traditional naturally reproducing population. You would think that
population would be infertile based on their estrogen levels.
They're so much lower than what ours are, but
they operate within the smaller range, and we are
the lower range, and we operate normally within a
higher range. Even on the individual level, my estrogen
to Testosterone levels, all of those things are gonna
be different than the person or you next door.
And we all operate within our narrow range. And
often when you start messing with those hormones, and
we'll go back to athletes for a moment, uh,
where they're making female athletes artificially lower their testosterone
levels to meet a certain metric in order to
compete, they are likely messing with that person's physiology
in so many different ways that have nothing to
do with athletic performance, that's gonna lead to poor
health and well-being. That that's my own soapbox side
note, uh, but again saying that Western populations of
higher estrogen, yeah, we do, but guess what? The
ones with lower estrogen levels still function just fine.
They reproduce, they go on long endurance walks and
they gather their bodies work within a lower estrogen
range, ours work within a higher estrogen range. That
I don't think is an argument and what's even
more mind blowing about that is that data comes
from their own research.
Uh, OK, but let me ask you this then,
and I'm not saying, I'm not claiming that, uh,
if this is a problem, it would favor their
claim over yours or vice versa. I'm just asking,
um, is, uh, isn't or couldn't it also be
a problem if we try to extrapolate because earlier
we talked about contemporary traditional societies and also Western
industrialized societies. Wouldn't it also be a problem, problem.
For both sides of the discussion here, if we
extrapolate from elite athletes in modern contemporary, in, in
modern industrialized societies to ancestral uh foraging peoples.
I completely agree. I, I mean, there, there's no
way around it. It's, it's, there's, there's 3 ways
to try to reconstruct the past. One is from,
you know, the actual bones and fossil records themselves.
Another is from comparative populations, and then a third
is from non-human comparisons, so like to chimpanzees, and
you usually have to combine all of that evidence.
So what's interesting when it comes to this woman,
the hunter idea is the behavior. We can get
from the fossil record. We can get that from
the bones and the stones. We can see that.
So we get that in 0.1. Um, 3, if
you want to think about the, the, the non-human
comparisons, we also see female chimps hunting. They spear
little primates with sticks. It's a thing. Um, THEY'RE
actually pretty good at it. Uh, AND so we
can make those comparisons, but when it comes to
the modern human one and the the physiology comparison
here, physiology doesn't really fossilize. Behavior does fossilize. In
some behaviors fossilize, not all. And so when we
think about hunting in the middle Paleolithic, we can
look at the fossilized evidence to get the behavior
and compare to, you know, non-human primates as well,
but we can't get the physiological evidence the way
they want. And so we have to look to
modern correlates. There's no other way to really try
to assess the ways in which physiology might be
working. We're and we're all always very open and
honest about that, that we know this isn't a
1 to 1 comparison, but it's kind of the
best we have to work with because physiology doesn't
fossilize in the way we would like it to.
So one final point from their commentary and then
we can talk about a few points from your
response, uh, your written response to that commentary. So,
uh, They, toward the end, they say something like,
I mean, they ask how likely it would be
for renting to have evolved as a stable universal
strategy for both sexes in equal terms with similar
trade-offs. I mean, what do you make of this
kind of question?
I'm actually not sure I fully understand the question.
Yeah, uh, I mean, the, the question is.
Sorry? No, go ahead, go ahead.
Yeah, yeah, no, I, I mean, the, the, the,
they say, I'm going to read the full quote.
It is not an all or nothing question or
one of can versus cannot. Rather, the question is,
how likely is it that hunting would have evolved
as a stable universal strategy for both sexes in
equal terms with similar trade-offs. Neither hunting nor reproduction.
Is activated overnight. That's the full.
So I, I don't disagree with anything there. It
isn't an all or nothing, uh, which is again
why I get very confused by say Vimics, you
know, being very adverse to this because we're not
claiming only women hunted. We're not claiming women hunted
more than men. We're claiming women did hunt and
women were capable of hunting. That's what we're claiming
because we can't come up with the rates and
the trade-offs. And again, you know, this idea of
being a stable strategy. And you know, I don't
know necessarily about stable, but I think it's a
strategy they had to employ in order to survive,
especially as you move in, you know, interglacial Europe.
Big game was kind of the the main thing
that they had to survive upon in a lot
of those environments. And so everyone had to be
doing it because one, it's difficult, and two, they
didn't have enough people and 3, that's what was
available to eat. Um, AND so. I think it
is very likely that they had to do hunting
as well just to survive in these small populations.
So getting then into your response to their commentary,
one of the points that you make that you
mentioned earlier, but I would like for you to
tell us a little bit more about it. This
question of men or women or both of them
hunting has a lot to do with the gender
division of labor or the sexual division of labor,
right? So, Um, why do you think that perhaps
in more ancestral middle Paleolithic societies, there wouldn't have
been, uh, such high levels of sexual division of
of
I think it's out of, I think it's out
of necessity. Uh, AND, and this again goes back
to the smaller population sizes. I mean sometimes group
sizes could be as small as 12, and that
would include children, um, who might not be physically
at an age in which they can go hunting
and things like that. I think it's out of
necessity. Uh, THAT that that was the demands of
the environment and the time in order for them
to survive. It had to be all hands on
deck. You couldn't say, hey, this one person is
going. Hunting? No. All 6 adults had to go
hunting, uh, or maybe 5 of the 6 and
1 stays back to, to mind the children while
they're gone. And then they bring everything back and
because there's so much, if it is a big
game, there's a lot of meat that needs preparation,
that can't just be left to half of the
population of 6 adults. Everyone has to chip in
to actually get this work done in order to
make it through. So I think it's out of
necessity for the time and the place.
And so, what do you think are perhaps some
of the main factors that contribute to escalating uh
levels of, uh, sex of a sexual division of
labor? I mean, does it have to do with,
uh, having settled society, sedentary societies, accumulation of resources?
I mean, what are exactly
the
factors that play a role here?
I think that's exactly it, and this does kind
of play to the point that, you know, Mellie
Martin's comment is about the energetics, is that once
we became sedentary and there was an accumulation of
wealth in the version of, you know, the form
of like food resources, water not talking gold, but
the accumulation of resources that enabled people to expend
fewer calories than they would have elsewhere, have more
reliable calories nearby, which would lead to a higher
reproductive output. And that is when, you know, this
idea that pregnancy and lactation become a problem with
females going out and doing other big activities. Once
things settle down and you can save calories, you
can push more towards reproduction, and that's where a
sexual division of labor likely came about is with
increased sedentism and increased resource collection and agriculture, um.
And that's kind of what we see, but there's
also a population explosion that the the rate of
reproduction is much higher at around the same time
a sexual division of labor appears.
So group size would also play a role
here. Group size would go way up. Yeah.
OK. So, uh, I, I mean, just before, because
I, I noticed that we still have time, so
perhaps we can also talk a little bit about
your scientific American article that you wrote with, you
wrote with Charles Roseman, who I have on the
show recently. Uh, BUT, but just before we get
into that, let me just make this sort of
comment myself, and then you can. Reply to it.
I, I mean, one thing that I find really
fascinating about this discussion of hunting in human societies
and whether it was mostly men doing it or
if women also participated in it, and if so,
what kind of hunting they participated in and at
what rates and so on, all all of those
questions. One thing that I find really fascinating is
Uh, I read your papers. I read papers from
people coming from the other and like Melanie Martin,
Vivek Vivek Veneterman, and other people. And I find
that most of the discussion, even though you disagree
on several points. I civil and uh you respect
one another and you say, so, OK, so we
agree with this and that point, but perhaps we
have to take into account uh the those other
two points there are uh those data there something
like that. But then, When it comes to how
people react to these papers on social media and
particularly people who are not anthropologists, ethnographers, oh my
God,
they think they are. They think they're scientists for
sure. I mean, yeah, I'll be upfront about this,
Ricardo. I had to to open up a police
report. Um, FOR the phone calls, physical hate mail
and emails I was receiving for both Scientific American
articles. Oh my God. Uh, YEAH, yeah, like that's
bad. Like, you know, once physical mail starts coming
to me in a threatening manner, you don't know
what someone is going to do and you know,
my office number and, you know, where to find
me on campus is really available on the internet.
It becomes kind of scary. Uh, AND so I
started a paper trail with that, and I actually
have the, the police officer's business card taped to
my computer so I can forward along any other
new, you know, BS that comes my way. And,
uh, yeah, this, this, these articles have a certain
sector of the public, really emotional, is what I
would say. It's the best way to put it.
I, I, I mean, but from my standpoint, I
mean, I am an interviewer, a science comm. AND
enthusiast, and I'm really very interested in anthropology and
social science in general. I mean, I get really
frustrated when people get into name-calling insults instead of
addressing like you did in your paper, like the
other people did in their own papers responding to
yours or reacting to yours or commenting on yours.
Uh, IT really irritates me how sometimes, and again,
it's most of the time is, it's non-experts, non-anthropologists,
um, replying to things or reacting to things that
way. How riled up some people get and, uh,
the sort of claims that they make that sometimes
people go all the way to claiming that. Just
because you're questioning whether rates of hunting for men
are really that high or if women participate that
the role in hunting, suddenly it's the collapse of
Western civilization,
yeah, yeah, no, the woke revisionist history I think
is my favorite one with all of this rather
than science, which is. Literally the nature of science
is cool. I have data. I, I, I think
the data means this, and you're like, oh, but
now there's new data, and this new data means
what I said before is no longer true. So
you incorporate that new data and you update your
hypotheses and your theories and all of that. And
it seems like there, I feel like there's just
a basic misunderstanding of how science works, and the
only thing that fixes science is new science. Like
that's how it works. And so this is actually
a wonderful example that I just found, um, so.
Um, AFTER Darwin's uh descent of man, there was
a small feminist backlash to it, and of course
women at the time of Darwin, they didn't have
access to the kind of education or resources like
they weren't allowed to go on the HMS Beagle
and hang out in the Galapagos Islands the way
Darwin did, um, and so Antoinette, uh, Louisa Brown
Blackwell, I've got her collection of essays in my
book right here, um. She starts, you know, taking
it apart, and there's a paragraph in the book
where she starts talking about lions and how like,
you know, it's very clear that the big strong
male lion is the one doing all of the
hunting and that, you know, the lioness is the
one caring for the young. And I'm like this
is the perfect example of new data is going
to refute old ideas and that we now know
it's actually female lions that do the vast majority
of the hunting in a lion pride and the
male does like the territory protection kind of thing.
And that's exactly what this is. That's exactly what
this whole woman the hunter idea is. And it's
unfortunately for them, and I would say, based on
data that's been in existence for a long time,
and people have just kind of ignored it. Nothing
we're saying is new. Adrian Zilman. Sarah Hardy, um,
and, uh, Andrew uh sorry, and Tanner, they, they've
been saying these things for decades, but we are
currently in a moment in which, you know, gender
is a huge issue, definitions of sex are a
huge issue. And you know, pushing for, you know,
gender parity, uh, in workplaces and everything else, it's
a hot button topic and so people are gonna
respond to this kind of paper in a much
stronger fashion than they would have, say, like 10
years ago even, um, and so yeah, new data
can refute old science. That's that's how we move
forward and so it's not a woke revisionist, you
know, history. We're just taking the data that existed
and actually showing it to you and people don't
like that. They really don't like that.
Uh, ALSO, uh, I mean, people who go all
the way to claiming that just by questioning this
sort of gender norms that we have or gendered
ideas that we have, or expectations we have for
both sexes that suddenly the collapse of societies around
the corner. I, I'm like, oh, OK, so now
we're getting into those arguments of the aliens are
coming. They're always coming, but they never appear.
When will they be here, Ricardo? I want to
meet some aliens, damn it. Yeah, but, but we've
been,
we've been hearing about the collapse of Western civilization
for us. I don't know how long and it
never comes. I mean,
the collapse of the family unit and all of
these things, da da da. And you know, I,
maybe this is going off, but I wanna make
sure it's a point that I put up there.
And, you know, this is what I get from
the various trolls online. And they think they're so
clever with gotchas of like, well, I repeated your
entire argument. Here is the list of top 10
marathon finishing times for females and males. Clearly this
means females weren't hunting. And I'm like, all right,
all right, 2 points here, buddy. Uh, ONE, never
in, you know, the history of human evolution and
persistence hunting is who is fastest gets. Animal. It's
who wears down that animal over a slow, long
slog. This isn't a foot race for fastest time.
So that's 0.1. 0.2 by that logic, males 70
years ago wouldn't have been incapable of hunting because
their marathon times are so much slower than males
today. Like, if that's what you're using as a
metric in an argument. You didn't think that one
fully through at all. Uh, AND you know that
is the thing is they they they think they
have these really interesting gotcha moments because they took
15 seconds to Google something, which somehow negates the
years of research that we have pulled together and
the amount of time and effort we have gone
through to comb through the data, read the old
old literature from the 1800s that is sometimes impenetrable
to read, to make sure we have a full
understanding of the bigger picture here and everyone thinks.
Having internet access makes you an expert in a
topic, and that's just not the case. I am
not an expert in immunology. I am not an
expert in mechanics. I am not about to go
tell somebody who is an expert in those things
I know better than they do. And there's always
a wish that I have with these various trolls,
like, I just wanna show up to their workplace
and take over their job because clearly, with my
10 seconds of Googling what their job is, I
can do their job better than they can. That's
how it feels like. Like seriously, this is what
you're going to do and you, you think it's
a big gotcha, and it's sad, uh, and it's
frustrating, is what it is.
Yeah, I understand that. And also just before we
get into your scientific American article, let me just
say that you mentioned them presenting data from marathons
to try to undermine your argument there, but also
let me just say that if you think that
Uh, being fast, awards, being able to catch prey,
then just on being fast alone, I don't think
we would be ever be able to catch anything
because I don't know many animals out there that
are slower than, than humans.
No, it's true. We can go for a Very
long time, but at a moderate pace. It's not,
you know, the, the two hour marathon phase. It's
just, yeah. Uh, BUT I still get comments like
that. I there was somebody who thought he was
being completely rational and rational and reasonable, and I'm
like, here's why it's not. And like, and then
they never actually respond back. Like when I decide
to actually take the time and effort to engage
with a troll, and I, I will put together
like, you know, 1000 words of like, here's why
this is incorrect. I never hear back from them
and I always find that really upsetting like. How
about just a thank you for your time and
effort, because this is some unpaid labor, right? Here's
what it is.
Yeah, I guess they can always put that in
the YouTube video with a title like, I've just
owned, uh, a, a woke feminist academ.
My goodness, there was, was it last week, some
guy went. On a Twitter tirade, he calls himself
like the illegitimate academic or something like that. And
every point he made demonstrated his complete and utter
lack of understanding of human evolution and the archaeological
record period. And he did so, you know, using
big capital letters and like rage-inducing language to like
get people angry about it. And then the very
last tweet was, I want to invite Kara Akabak
and Sarah Lacey onto my YouTube channel so we
can discuss it. BECAUSE despite what the, you know,
the above threads says, I actually respect their work
and think we should have a conversation. I'm like,
you do not respect anything, and you have barely
even a sophomoric understanding of human evolution. Why would
I give you my time and effort just to
contribute to your rage factory? I'm not gonna do
it.
That you know, but that's just how argumentation works
on the internet. If you write in all caps,
you've immediately won the argument. There's nothing the other
person can do about it.
Fair point, fair point. My next publication will be
in all capital letters.
Oh my God. So, OK, so let's get then
into your scientific American article with Charles Roseman. To
understand sex, we need to to ask the right
questions. So, Uh, tell us what, uh, because this
is another one that generated a huge backlash on
social media. But, uh, to be clear, what are
your arguments there exactly?
So people love to say like, you know, your,
you know, biology didn't. Styalists and, you know, things
like that by saying, you know, sex isn't a
binary. Well, it kind of depends on what you're
talking about. And it, and it really does depend
on the question. And so I like to use
the examples of hormones, uh, because I, I think
this makes the most sense. And, and why the
question you're asking should determine how you are defining
or operationalizing sex in any study that you do.
And I, uh, 100% will say there are reasons
and times that you use a sex binary in
your work. I do when it comes to my
finished reindeer herders. At the moment, every single individual's,
uh, you know, sex and gender line up. And
so I do split things into male and female
doing the, the actual analysis, uh, to compare things.
So there are times to use it. But there
are also times where it doesn't make sense. And
so that comes with the hormones when we talk
about the ideas of, you know. If you're breaking
things up by sex and you're looking at estrogen
and just saying all females have, you know, estrogen
within this range and males within this range, you're
not actually asking a question about estrogen. If you
are breaking things up just based on male versus
female and assuming a certain estrogen level in one
and assuming a certain estrogen level in the other,
you're not gonna get your answer your question answered
in any way. You need to actually take a
look at the estrogen levels or the testosterone levels.
If you are interested in chromosomes, yeah, the vast
majority of females are going to be X. And
the vast majority of males are going to be
XY. But there is variation that we see, and
we can't discount that. That doesn't mean those aren't
people because they don't fit within this neat and
tidy box. Uh, YOU can say the same thing
about external genitalia, internal gonads, secondary sexual characteristics, any
number of things that are going to exist on
a continuum of, you know, the extreme of full
one on the other and the extreme of the
one on, you know, the other end of it,
and you're gonna have this middle range going in
between. And that's That's human variation. That's nature's variation,
you, you like. If we use intersex as an
example. Intersex uh variation is actually really common in
bears and in pigs. This isn't just like a
human figment of our imagination of woke culture of
I'm different and recognize me. No, this kind of
thing exists all over the place. Um, I don't
necessarily like using other animal examples cause like, well,
we're humans and we're different and human exceptional and
so on and so forth. But I think it
really does depend on the question you're asking. If
you are interested in chromosomes, then you need to
actually look at chromosomes. If you're interested in hormones,
then you need to actually measure the Hormones. And
there is likely going to be, you know, a,
a double distribution bell curve of female and male
on these things, but there's also gonna be overlap
between those two curves. Um, AND you, you cannot
put every single person in one solid female box
and one solid mail box. Um, AND I, I
will use myself as an example as somebody who
has higher than what would be average testosterone levels
for a female. I am genetically a female and
I have a, you know, normal, naturally. During menstrual
cycle, but I also have a little bit higher
estrogen, or I'm sorry, testosterone, uh, than what would
be expected. And, you know, what does that mean
for me? Do I not fit in the female
box? No, I have higher testosterone. Great. Whatever. Um,
BUT that's the kind of thing that someone might
assume my testosterone levels based on me being a
female, and they would be wrong. And so if
I were put into a study looking at the
effects of hormones on, you know, athletic performance or
whatever, and they're just assuming those that are female
have higher estrogen, lower testosterone. I'm not gonna fit
that distribution as well as they think, and that's
gonna be true across humans.
So let me ask you this then, um. Do
you think that there would be scientifically speaking, or
there should be a precise universal definition of sex,
like, for example, distinguishing between males and females on
the basis of their gamete size, or You
can absolutely do that, and if the the the
question you are asking depends on gamete size, then
sure. But I think it depends on the question,
because you're also gonna get individuals who don't produce
gametes or they don't have the gamete producing organs,
uh, you know what, or they have one of
each, which is a thing that does happen, um,
and so I think it entirely depends on the
question and if it's gametete size that matters to
you for whatever it is you're researching, then hey,
great. Um, AND I think the bigger issue with
this, you know, in, in the broader public and
social media universe is this idea of, you know,
and I think you kind of brought it up,
you know, collapse of society and there's no longer
traditional gender roles and now we don't even know
what sex we are like, no, people know an
individual knows who they. ARE and where they fall
on what spectrum and continuum. You have an issue
of there being greater complexity in the universe. And
I'm sorry that you have that problem, but that's,
that's kind of biology. It's, it's, it's complex, and
you can't fit really anything into these really neat,
tidy boxes. That's just not how it is. If
we did that, there would be problems. Yeah, again.
Sperm and egg are important for reproduction. No denying
that, that is a biological reality, but it's not
necessarily biological reality for everybody. And the point that
Charles and I make at the end of that
article, I believe I think is the most important.
It should not determine how we treat one another.
It should not determine how we categorize other humans
on like and, you know, an ethical, moral, hierarchical
level and a societal level. That's where this is
really becoming problematic. The ways in which we define
sex is going to change based on the questions
we're asking to make sure the variables that we're
interested in are the ones we're measuring, and we're
not assuming a certain range of those variables because
of what we typically consider to be female, what
we typically consider to be male. It's gonna be
the range across the two.
Uh, BUT would the terms like, or a distinction
between male and female always apply across all species
or, or, or at least perhaps to be more
precise, with the binary always apply to all species
or
not? I mean. A binary thing is like because
there are times where there isn't a strict binary
there, uh, but there are always going to be
exceptions to it. I think a binary makes a
lot of sense in um an evolutionary context because
you have to view it as a reproductively successful
population or reproductively successful species and at least within.
That this is, you know, obviously not true for
bacteria, which there are far more bacteria than any
other, you know, mammal, bird and lizard on this
planet, um, you know, a binary doesn't make sense
for them and they reproduce just fine. But when
we're talking about animals that do rely on sexual
reproduction. A binary makes perfect sense for understanding, you
know, evolutionary patterns with an evolutionary, uh, uh, context
because it is about reproduction as well. So survival
and reproduction, you have to be able to reproduce
to the next generation. And yeah, you need sperm
and eggs to do that. Uh, SO certain contexts
it makes absolute perfect sense, but in others it
might not.
Uh, SO let me just see if I understand
this correctly. Uh, PERHAPS one of the main claims
you're making there is that, uh, sex as a
category is not in many contexts is, is not
a good enough. Uh, PROXY for variation in certain
specific, for example, anatomic physiological, metabolical, uh, factors or
variants,
right. Absolutely, absolutely, you have it right. Uh, USING
sex as a proxy for continuous variables, using a
binary as a proxy for something that's continuous, that's
deeply problematic. And it's bad science.
Yeah, so let me just ask you about this,
and this is, of course, more of a question
that falls more on the social slash political aspect
of of sex-related questions because we know that this
has. IMPLICATIONS for how we deal, for example, or
the basis on which non-binary trans people and queer
people argue for their rights sometimes and their political
and social standing. Um, DO you think that in
humans specifically, it makes sense to talk about sex
as being. No, I'm, I'm mentioning sex, you're not
gender, just to be careful. Um, IS sex as
being non-binary. Does that make sense in
human? So I mean, I think it depends on
how you're defining sex in that case. Are you
defining it as like the reproducing individuals? Is there
are going to be individuals, you know, even in
our evolutionary past that, you know, maybe they have
XY, but they do. Not breed because they are,
they do not reproduce because they don't actually want
to have sex with a female. Like that's entirely
possible. So it depends a little bit on how
you're defining sex in that case you can see
how it gets complicated, right? Uh, THAT it's not,
yeah, great, male and female, but like maybe they're
not actually all in the reproductive pool producing offspring.
Right. No, I, I wanted to ask you that
because, and I hope I'm not misrepresenting his view,
but as I said, I've interviewed earlier this year,
Doctor Charles Roseman, and he said that there were
one or two points where you disagreed with each
other when it comes to how to think about
sex. And one point that he made is that
He thought that, particularly in the case of humans
and for the pur for social and political purposes,
he didn't think that people claiming that sex in
humans is non-binary really serves their purposes. Uh, I
yeah, I, I mean, I actually agree with him
on that. I think actually most of the points
of contention. AND I would often have is how
to say things. He has not, like, he has
the most beautiful writing. It's, it's actually quite the
joke that he uses the scalpel and I use
the sledgehammer. I am very blunt about things and
he is so eloquent. And so we have very
different styles when it comes to writing, and I
think that can lead to us maybe not always
understanding what the other is saying, even though we're
good friends and we get along just fine. A
binary is absolutely going to be useful in many,
many circumstances and claiming that the majority of people
do not fit within a binary, that would be
false. The majority do. The the caveat there is
there are those who don't, and again, because they
don't, that should not determine how we treat them,
that we don't consider them lesser, that they aren't
people because they don't fit within a binary as
we typically see it. So yeah, for a lot
of things, a binary does make perfect sense and
it does exist with exceptions.
Right. And I mean, I also uh tend to
agree with that point and uh I'm trying to
be respectful of uh trans people, non people who
identify as non-binary and daughters like that because I
also don't think that. Um, I mean, they need
to argue on the basis of sex to defend
their position. They can just argue on the basis
of gender and say that, for example, gender doesn't
need to be non-binary also because gender is a
social construct. So if you just, if we just
as a society, change that and decide that it's
no longer binary. I guess that's perfectly fine and
and and it serves, uh, also it would serve
also their social and political uh purposes,
yeah, I mean. I, I, I, I am not
somebody who, who knows the deep roots of activism
and how it comes about and how they decide
to formulate the messages. Uh, I, I think it
complicates things for sure that if they were to
like move more towards a gendered language than a
sex language, people might. No, I'm not actually that's
not true. People would just have just as many
problems, like the, the people who are transphobic, it
doesn't matter. No matter what language you use, they're
still gonna have a problem with it when it
comes down to it. But to go to the
point of like, you know, what Charles was saying
about, you know, there isn't a binary, you know,
there there is, again, broadly, overall, there is, uh,
and on average it does work. But again, how
useful is that binary for the questions you are
asking and how you're testing them. Uh, AND so
on like, you know, scientifically, you really need to
think about things of whether a binary makes sense
or not. When it comes into the social world
and the activist world. Is using sex a great
idea? I honestly don't know versus gender. I do
know that people are still gonna spout hate no
matter what term you use. Um, YOU know, we
saw this with, um, you know, the gay and
lesbian community and you know, the 70s and 80s
and hell, even early 90s to that point, that
like it's terrifying and they're ruining marriages and the
traditional family, but hey, guess what, now they can
marry and the world did not collapse in on
itself. Shocker, I know, and it's just there always
seems to be a new group of people for
other people to hate, to to marginalize and ostracize
and hate and and it's gonna take a probably
longer than we all want it to to move
through this current one. I, I think we will
get there, but in this moment I think them
changing their language is not gonna change anything for
the people who are very against transgender individuals.
Uh, ALSO, I guess that we can also mention
here that if the simple fact that there would
be people in the society that wouldn't necessarily identify
as men or women or just identify as non-binary
or somewhere in between would lead to. Societal collapse,
then there would have been many more societies out
there already collapsing.
My, my grandfather was convinced that if they legalized
gay marriage, the population would collapse because apparently legalizing
gay marriage means everybody then becomes gay and they
will never have children. And it's just like that
is a wild thinking that like that's not what
that means. This just means that we are giving
rights and recognition to people who do not identify
the same way we do. Just because you make
it acceptable and legal does not make everyone going
to do it. Just like left-handedness. Left-handedness was super
uncommon for a very long period of time because
it was associated with being evil and a mark
of the devil. And once that belief kind of
went away, guess what? You got a bunch of
left-handed people all of a sudden because it wasn't
ostracized and it wasn't marginalized, uh, and so yeah,
I, this is the moment in time we are
with the society and and the current focus is
on transgender individuals and It's causing so much harm,
uh, that it's, it's deeply saddening and frustrating to
to see it play out.
And also, I, I don't understand at all if
that argument they make was true how Samoan society
hasn't collapsed yet with the fa'afafine there. And even
more dramatically, how Indian society keeps. Growing with the
third sex.
Yeah. There's, there are tons of cultures that have
different genders that like there isn't a binary gender.
There are multiple gender categories, and one even changes
gender throughout life course, and, and, you know, how
they're viewed by their culture. And it just kind
of comes from People don't like things that they
can't easily put into boxes. Our minds really like
clean cut things that we can put in one
box or the other, and we get very flustered
when we realize there's added variation and complication to
things. And I get that. Like, we all like
uncomplicated things, but that's just not how humans work
or biology works. It's just not the way of
it.
Yeah, and it's also not as fun to have
uncomplicated things because that's also why I like to
discuss with someone like you on the show about
hunting. And also people who come from the other
side because I mean, for me, it's just fun
to have,
uh. You're gonna get a lot of hits on
this and, and likely from people you don't want
to get hits from the, uh, the woman, the
Hunter Scientific American article and then the Scientific American
article with Charles Roseman were like the two topmost
view getting articles in Scientific American that I have
seen. Um, THEIR, their typical cover stories might get
300 to 50,000 views. Woman the Hunter got over
2.1 million. Oh my God. Yeah, and then the,
the, the sex one with Charles got like 400
to 500,000 and so like. It it gets traction
and you know we got thrown to the wolves
a little bit knowing trolls would be coming after
it, but like, you know, it's, it gets the
attention for sure.
Well, at least one thing is true for sure,
and a scientific American must be happy with that.
Very likely, very happy. I still need to get
the cover framed at some point and put it
up on my wall, but I've been very lazy
about that.
OK, great. So, uh, I mean, perhaps this is
a good point for us to wrap up the
interview. I mean, is there anything else you would
like to add what we talked during this long
conversation?
We covered so much. It was just like so
many things. Um, I'm about to spend the next
year in Finland, which is really exciting collecting data,
so I figured I'd throw that out there too.
Um, I'm not entirely sure of the, the full
viewing folks for your show, but I am looking
for grad students as well, so if somebody is
interested in working with me, please, please contact me.
And you know what, people who disagree with me,
you can contact me too if you are willing
to have a reasonable conversation and not tell me
I'm to blame for the existence of women firefighters,
then I am more than happy to talk with
you about the evidence for Woman the Hunter.
Yeah, also people who are interested in that, they
can just come on my YouTube particularly and, uh,
put all the hate comments there, which I will
promptly ignore because that's my ammo. But anyway, you're
free to go.
My favorite is always people commenting like she doesn't
look like she could hunt and I'm just like,
oh. Oh, it's a thing they did very little
research into my background as a former power lifter
and I'm actually pretty good at archery too, and
it just cracks me up about these assumptions people
make because I'm a woman academic, clearly I'm not
capable of physical activity, uh.
No, you're just pure intellect, and you should be.
How could I be? I'm a woman, Ricardo. I
got the smooth lady brain that keeps me from
thinking, and I just want to pop out babies
all the time.
Uh, YES, everyone.
That's sarcasm, everybody, so it doesn't get taken out
of context. It totally will be, uh, but whatever.
OK, and where can people find you on the
internet?
Uh, SO I am on, I think like most
of the social media things and because I have
an unusual name, it's easy to find me. Um,
ON Twitter, it's at Kara Akabak and that's C
A R A O C O B O C
K. And I believe that's also true for like
blue sky and threads and mastodon and Don't find
me on Facebook. I only keep that for close
friends and family, um, and then of course if
you Google Notre Dame and Kara Akabak, you will
find my professional website.
Great. So, look, thank you so much for the
fun conversation. I really loved it and I laughed
a lot with this one, so thank you so
much for coming on the show.
Oh thank you so much, Ricardo. It was an
absolute delight and my guess is you're probably gonna
go to bed soonish there in Portugal.
Uh, NO, it's still 4 p.m. so it's
only a 5 hour difference. OK. It's 7 hours
in Finland and I don't always remember where things
line up. Yeah, but yeah, all right, wonderful. Well,
thank you. You have a great afternoon and I
really enjoyed this.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alexand Castle, Matthew Whitting Barna Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the Matter
Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Neevs Colin Holbrookfield governor Michael
Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnseroro and Hal Herzognun
Macha Joan Labrant John Jasent and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujurumen ro Diego Londono Correa. Yannick Punterrusmani
Charlotte blinikolbar Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine, Gary Galman
Samovallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin
Bronner, Douglas Free Francaortolotti Gabrielon Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zacharyishim
Duffyani Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul
Georgianeau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin,
David Williams, the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber,
Robert Gray Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix,
Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van
Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers
Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.